Good morning Before granting you entry to Poland you must first answer these simple questions Who did not invent vodka? Russia Correct How many letters are there in the Polish alphabet? Too many Correct Which group of people do the Polish repeatedly turn their backs on? The Poznan football team Correct What was the common building material used in Polish architecture throughout the 1980's? Eastern blocks Correct Why can Polish people see through everything? Because of Marie Curie Correct Name Poland's most famous pianist? Adrien Brody Ah of course Why do the left wing and right wing parties in Poland disagree so strongly? Because they are Poles apart Correct Why did Polish people find it so hard to wake up in the mornings? Because of the iron curtains Correct Name Poland's most famous son a devout Catholic with several miracles to his name who became a symbol for a global religion Lewandowski Correct Despite recent elections who is still the most popular polish leader of all time? Pope John Paul II Correct yeah and final question an easy one Named the predominantly Catholic country that drinks alcohol at every occasion and loves to eat potatoes Haha It's Ireland No it's Poland Oh no it's Ireland Poland Ireland! No it's Ireland the potatoes and all that Woah woah woah It's both of us hahaha Yeah but it's mostly us though no that is [ __ ] Doomdah Hi we're Foil Arms and Hog we've got some exciting new European dates on sale Where are we going? We are going to Paris Zurich we're going to Tallinn and Warsaw If you don't come we never come back so you know no pressure that's how it works Doomdah|||this video is sponsored by hubsports this is Poland a country home to just under 38 million people and one of the fastest growing economies in Europe which is a continent that has unfortunately been characterized by slow or even negative economic progress in recent decades Poland is a fascinating economy for a number of reasons not least of which is that by all metrics it shouldn't really be as successful as it is and that the economy is Shifting so rapidly that there is a good chance that the demographic statistics we just listed are already wildly out of date but more on that later Poland's economic performance may be strong when compared to its peers in the European Union but it's outstanding when compared to its former Soviet neighbors up to and including Russia which is a country with a much larger labor pool far more natural resources and more International influence despite this where Russia and a lot of other former Soviet States fumbled the transition to market-based globally Cooperative economies Poland succeeded despite dealing with modern historical challenges that were unmatched anywhere else in the world if Poland's current rate of industrial growth continues it could be one of the largest economies in Europe which has the potential to be a vital Lifeline for the European Union as it struggles with sustained economic stagnation amongst many key member states outside of just being a nice good news story Poland's economic success is also an invaluable case study that could potentially be applied to other countries around the world especially those on both sides of the invasion of Ukraine now no country exists without problems and while Poland's economic growth has been nothing short of remarkable it's still poor country by European standards and it's only just starting to break into the global upper middle class this is a period of development where countries are typically at their most vulnerable and even minor economic shocks can undo decades worth of progress there is no reason to believe that Poland won't be susceptible to the same challenges of Shifting demographics the expectations of sustained growth and getting out competed by the other countries that can do the same thing for the same price the country also faces some very real challenges that are unique to just Poland its geopolitical neighborhood is not awesome part of the reason that it makes for such a great case study is because it's so geographically close to the countries that are going to need to learn its lessons while the chance of Poland actually being invaded is extremely slim the situation does still present major challenges for the rapidly developing economy but if it can address these problems it may genuinely have a shot at being one of the world's wealthiest and most influential economies potentially even rivaling its neighbors Germany on a per capita basis so how did Poland get to where it is today why do economists find development so outstanding could the same lessons be applied to other countries that are completely economically crippled and finally could its current set of challenges undo decades worth of progress once we've done all of that we can as always put Poland one of Europe's Rising economic miracles on the economics explained National leaderboard while our team at e had been using chat GPT in mid Journey alongside other AI powered tools I had no idea how useful AI could be to free up time to do more creative and fun parts of our work here that is until I read HubSpot free guide on using chat GPT at work while some people use chat GPT once to ask it to write a poem about their dog for Laughs we've been able to significantly cut down on our workload by teaching the AI how to give us answers that fit exactly what we need as the HubSpot guide explains you don't want to be using chat GPT to replace your copywriting or sales tasks that need a personal touch but using it to automate boring and non-value adding tasks like writing functional descriptions will give you an outline for a document that you need to write is amazing to prevent the times where you're staring at a blank page wondering where to starts after reading the we also started using chat GPT to analyze our YouTube data which has been incredibly useful for us at e to help Sith through the numbers and percentages to get a better idea of what kinds of videos to make for you you can get Hub spots incredibly useful guide for free at the link in the description and start training chat PT to take a lot of pressure off your work today the economy of Poland as it exists today really got its start in 1990 before that while the Country Wasn't technically a state of the Soviet Union it fell effectively under their control as it was led by a communist government indirectly picked by Moscow in 1989 with the failing dominance of the Soviet Union the country elected a new party for the first time since the old government was ousted during the country's invasion in the second world war the new government set about the process of doing what a lot of former Soviet states in the region including Russia itself were doing privatizing in the Communist economic system of the Soviet States and by extension Poland almost all industries were state-owned with very few exceptions as these countries transitioned to free market economies these state-owned departments needed to be changed into private companies this was a surprisingly challenging process in all of the countries because it becomes difficult to decide who gets what in established free market economy state-owned assets are sold off all the time a simple search of government privatizers should deliver a long list of articles about things like electrical grids highways and even state-owned banks that get sold off to private investors all the time this is sometimes controversial but there's nothing inherently wrong with doing this because often times private Enterprise with a profit motive and healthy competition can deliver better results and cost consumers less overall than public run organizations with no competition and no particular incentive to be any kind of efficient of course there is always a balance and the real economic debate is to be had over what Enterprises are best privatized and what are Best Kept as state Services rather than arguing that everything should be privatized or everything should be owned by the people but with that small tangent out of the way Poland did realize that its current extreme system of full State control over all industry was going to need a change this rapid process of privatization and Adoption of free markets came to be known as shock therapy because it was ultimately a necessary step for these countries but its rapid and somewhat haphazard Administration pushed all of the former Soviet States and Poland back significantly and by the 1990s none of these countries were doing too fantastic to begin with the former Soviet Union didn't fall apart because its economy was booming by the time of claiming effective Independence most of Poland's population lived in complete poverty and the country had a per capita output of around $1,200 similar to a country like Zimbabwe or or Pakistan today accounting for inflation now in Poland economists still refer to this process of privatization as shock therapy but it was a lot less shocking than it was in the other countries Poland didn't lose nearly as much economic capacity during the transition because its new government favored a slow and steady approach to changing from a centrally planned economy most large Industries remained under State Control initially and it wasn't until the mid 2000s that most major industries in the country were privately run instead of splitting up State assets and deciding who would get them in a process that let's be honest was wildly susceptible to corruption Poland adopted the philosophy of if Private Industry really was better and more efficient it would let its citizens Build It Up from scratch to compete with existing state owned Enterprises the theory was that if the private sector was so great it should have no problem out competing the large cumbersome state owned companies this strategy still achieved the same end goal of economic liberalization but when compared to the other countries Russia in particular it didn't create an environment where people could just bribe or subvert their way into being handed the country's resources they were simply liberated to go out and build wealth for themselves Poland does have far fewer natural resources than its ex Soviet neighbors so there was arguably less opportunity to hand natural resource wealth over to a small group of oligarchs but the slow and steady approach did mean that small local industries were allowed to grow basically from the beginning of Market transition the slower approach also made the country more economically stable because the landscape of the economy wasn't being changed overnight again in Russia by comparison people basically went to sleep in an economy where the state at least theoretically provided them with everything they needed and assign them specific responsibilities and then woke up in an economy where they had to figure everything out for themselves given this environment it's perhaps unsurprising that Russia was marred by such political instability in the years that followed and unfortunately this is a vicious feedback loop if a country is politically unstable Advanced Industries will struggle to get established there without advanced Industries the country will struggle with economic instability and if people are not looked after economically they're going to demand political change leading to further political instability Poland by contrast maintained enough political stability that it became one of the first former Soviet republics to become members of notoriously selective International groups like NATO and the European Union Beyond just getting its foot in the door to these big International groups the relative stability combined with the still far lower incomes demanded by polish workers at the time meant that it became a highly attractive destination for lowcost manufacturing major industrial European nations Germany and France in particular set up industrial relations with Poland to build less technical components for advanced end products like motor vehicles and airplanes Poland already had decent Manufacturing Industries in place and when it joined the European Union it became very easy for these countries to do business there and make the necessary Investments needed to modernize their existing factories instead of paying far more expensive French or German Workers to build basic parts that didn't need a lot of skill or Outsourcing that manufacturing to a country like China which was outside of the EU and therefore attracted significant import taxes it was much more cost effective to set up Manufacturing in Poland especially since it now shared a direct lamb order with a unified Germany Poland never adopted the Euro like other former Soviet states such as laia Lithuania and Estonia so there was that that made crossb business slightly more difficult but given its industrial potential it was still a more popular destination to set up industry although these other states have also benefited from this too just to a slightly lesser degree even today Poland trades almost exclusively with Europe and while that's been a great opportunity for the country and one of the primary drivers of its sustained economic growth it does have some drawbacks Poland has been able to grow its domestic economy by providing a larger amount of progressively more Technical and valuable exports to the big Eur European manufacturing Powers but there is an eventual limit to that the growth of the countries that Poland is selling its exports to have mostly been stagnant for more than a decade now which means eventually Poland is going to reach a limit on how much it can sell to these countries it could start exporting its manufactured goods to other countries around the world but it wouldn't be competing with the same advantages that it has when exporting stuff within the EU because the European Union taxes most Imports entering its borders but it doesn't tax any trade between member nations Poland didn't need to be the most globally competitive Nation to become regionally competitive as long as it could provide products that were cheaper than traditional centers of lowcost manufacturing after an import tariff it would keep an able to export goods if Poland could produce a car air conditioning unit for €500 and China with its lower cost labor force and more established industrial infrastructure could produce the same thing for €400 but it got hit with a € 150 import tax then even though China is more competitive an EU country like Germany would still choose to buy its components from Poland of course this is a very oversimplified example the exact trade taxes and restrictions in place for trading partners within the European Union is incredibly extensive and complicated but the basic Theory still stands now while this has being a great opportunity for Poland it's kind of Trapped it if it tried to trade globally it would easily be outc competed by cheaper Senators that it's currently protected from because of its EU membership its location is also great for trading within the European continent but it's surprisingly isolated from the world's oceans through the Baltic Sea now other European countries have been able to competitively trade with the rest of the world but for now at least Poland doesn't quite have the same cach a of Germany France or even Italy where Global consumers are willing to pay a premium for luxury cars or consumer goods because a handbag made in Poland doesn't quite elicit the same feelings of luxury as a handbag made in France Beyond being restricted by its guilded cage of captive trade partners that aren't growing much themselves Poland will also have to deal with the fact that as it and its people continue to grow wealthier they're going to become less competitive today after three decades of sustained economic growth Poland has a GDP per capita of $18,000 about 50% higher than the global average but still significantly lower than most other European centers especially those in the west but if this continues to grow at the rate it currently has been which hopefully it will then wages are going to continue to grow as well which they have been eventually Poland is going to lose its comparative advantage as a lowcost estimation for manufacturing to other Eastern European countries that are coming up behind it this is known as the middle- inome Trap where a country becomes too rich to be competitive with lowcost labor but not rich enough to develop its own ADV Advanced Industries this is something that we've explored many times on the channel before when we looked at economies like South Korea Japan Taiwan Vietnam Brazil and even China some countries can successfully make the jump and some really do struggle and end up going backwards the only difference in Poland's case is that it's falling into the middle inome trap within a market that itself is struggling to remain globally competitive and that's just the first of the country's major challenges most economists agree that membership in the EU was a positive step for Poland not only did it clearly demonstrate that it was a country had been led into a fairly exclusive Club it also gave it a captive Market to grow its economy off of but it didn't come without drawbacks the first was simply that because the EU reduced the barriers to workers finding a job in any member country to effectively zero Poland had a major problem with brain drain the smartest youngest and most productive workers now had the option to stay in Poland or they could alternatively go just across the border into Germany where they could earn on average twice as much for work in much the same industry a lot of well-educated young polish workers already learned German and English as as a second or third language so it was an easy step for a lot of them to take additionally a lot of the same companies that were operating in Poland to produce component manufacturing Parts also had operations in wealthier Western European countries so a lot of Polish workers could stay with their employer while getting a job that paid more remittances where workers moving money over the Border would send money back home to their families in Poland at the peak accounted for nearly 3% of total GDP which did help but it didn't make up for the Lost tax revenue and labor force since it was mostly young workers at the peak of of their career from the perspective of a heartless Economist with a singular focus on maximizing output this situation meant that Poland just had the leftovers of people that were less economically ambitious or older and on average required more Social Services while contributing less to the tax base this trend obviously slowed growth but as we explored earlier incomes are rising and now the difference between working in Germany and working in Poland is not as Extreme as it was even a decade ago as that creates the problem of the middle- income trap it's also solving the problem of brain drain provided that Poland can find work for all these people returning home the movement of young workers should be closely monitored but it's no longer the country's primary demographic concern outside of the countries directly involved in the conflict the invasion of Ukraine has perhaps most intensely been felt in Poland it has the same energy concerns as most other countries in Europe but on top of that given its Geographic position directly bordering the conflict Zone it's been used as a base of operations by forces supplying military and civilian Aid to Ukraine it's also been by far the most popular destination for over 1.6 million refugees fleeing the conflict given Poland's own extensive history been stuck between major powers in Europe and Russia the country is been accommodating but it's coming at a significant cost 1.6 million people entering a relatively small country within the span of 2 years is going to be an economic shock no matter what but a large share of these people are elderly or young children again speaking as an incredibly cold-hearted macroeconomist people that consume more resources than they produce tragic Ally of course there is currently no end in sight for the conflict and even when fighting does stop many commentators expect that people won't move back because of the relative safety better job opportunities and higher living standards offered by Poland some issues are more important than maximizing economic output and this is clearly one of them but it also has to be recognized that despite all of its success in recent decades Poland is still not a rich Advanced economy yet at least and a major shock like this has the potential to undo a lot of the progress the country has worked very hard for while it makes the difficult often perilous transition from a manufacturing center to an advanced service-based economy in addition to this huge demographic shift Poland has also made commitments towards massively expanding its military if it sticks to these plans it will have the largest military in Europe and be spending as much as 5% of its total economic output on a military that will hopefully never be needed that is a larger percentage than it was spending during the final years of the Soviet Union and more than double what it is at the moment National Defense is a crucial aspect of any country and it's understandable that Poland wants to take a proactive approach to looking after itself given its vulnerable location in the world but this is going to be a significant economic burden on top of a growing number of other economic burdens that Poland is going to need to manage to continue its growth and catch up with its European peers okay now it's time to put Poland one of Europe's fastest growing major economies on the economics explained National leaderboard starting as always with size Poland has a GDP of $688 billion making it the 21st largest economy in the world of Argentina and a fairway behind Switzerland even still this is a major economic Force so for now it gets an 8 out of 10 that output is spread out over a population of 37.7 million people as of 2020 as we explored in this video that population is significantly higher now due to an influx of refugees from Ukraine and as population increases all other things been equal GDP per capita will decrease but according to the most recently available statistics the country has a per capita output of 18,32 $1 which is in line with regional peers like Croatia and Hungary as the 52nd most productive country in the world on a per capita basis Poland gets a 6 out of 10 stability and confidence is an interesting one the country itself is shown that it can avoid problems with endemic corruption and economic mismanagement it's not perfect but it's by far in a way better than most former Soviet States the country has also been able to cultivate strong international relations and avoid higher levels of government debt something that will likely pay significant dividends with the economic challenges it's facing as a result of losing its cost competitive Regional advantage and the war in Ukraine economic problems like these are always going to be a challenge but a barely sustainable level of debt can quickly turn a challenge into a crisis and for now at least the debt rate in the country should be easily manageable especially since it also has easy access to the world's second most traded Global Currency the Euro balancing the good with the bad Poland gets a 7 out of 10 growth has been strong by Regional standards but that particular region is made up of countries that have been experiencing very slow and often even negative growth Poland's slow and steady approach has been a blessing in disguise though countries that can boast double- digit economic growth figures year after year are more often than not resorting to some very unsustainable practices to achieve that growth which can easily come at the expense of long-term economic success measured over decades in many ways Poland's roughly 5% annual growth rate is kind of The Sweet Spot for a rapidly developing economy but even still it's below the true outliers over the past decade so it gets an 8 out of 10 finally IND Poland has built a very strong manufacturing industry and today it's moving into more advanced value adding services like technology finance and Engineering for now it gets a 7 out of 10 because it's still growing and none of its Industries are World leading in any capacity but if it keeps developing like it has been that could change very quickly alt together that gives Poland an average score of 7.2 out of 10 which puts it up here on the leaderboard a very respectable position and one that will hopefully be even better when exploring this rapidly developing economy in a few years time we can Poland's relative economic success a lot to Russia's in the post-soviet era now we've already made an entire video on this one from Russia's perspective so we didn't want to repeat too much here but you should be able to click to that video on your screen now for the full story thanks for watching mate bye|||After the devastation it suffered in World
War II, Poland was a struggling nation, and life didn’t get any easier when it became
a satellite state of the Soviet Union. But Poland has been clawing back its status
as a major player in Europe, and some are saying it may even soon surpass the once mighty
Great Britain as a major world power, both economically and militarily. That’s a big claim, so let’s examine Poland’s
rise to power and how it might just be turning into Europe's Next Superpower. If you went to Poland a few decades ago, around
the time Coca-Cola was still regarded as something of a luxury item and a symbol of American
capitalist imperialism, life might have looked a little grim. This was a country that had been torn apart
in the war, hit from two sides by the Germans and Soviets, and then faced decades of hardship
under Communist rule. In historical terms, Poland has certainly
experienced some extreme ups and downs. As the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth in the
early 17th century, Poland was a force to be reckoned with, able to defend itself against
other powers and more than capable of its own aggressive actions against its neighbors. At its peak, the Commonwealth was home to
11 million people and had spread itself over one million square km, compared to(Poland
today which is 121,209 square miles (313930 square km). Much of Ukraine was under Polish rule for
much of this period, which Russia fought it for, but the Commonwealth was easily a match
for Russia. In fact, in the Polish–Muscovite War of
1605 to 1618, the Poland–Lithuania Commonwealth made substantial territorial gains in the
region on the European front, something Russia would never forget. This was the Polish Golden Age though, a renaissance
period for Poland. The country was a major political, military,
and economic power, and while it never quite reached the heights of other great European
great powers or colonized other nations, its prowess allowed its culture and language spread
far and wide, a process known as Polonization. But then came the downfall, where Poland was,
in effect, erased as a nation. Bit by bit, the country was taken apart in
what we now call the partitions of Poland. These occurred piecemeal in 1772, 1793, and
1795. Russia, Prussia, and Austria together picked
Poland apart, and Poland wasn’t militarily strong enough to stop these huge territorial
seizures from happening, which had been weakened from its oligarchical rule. In just the first partition, Poland lost around
half of its population and about one-third or (81,500 square miles, 211,000 square km)
of its land. In the second, Russia and Prussia took another
115,000 square miles (300,000 square km), and after these two countries quelled a Polish
uprising in 1794, Poland lost another 83,000 square miles (215,000 square km). Austria grabbed part of what was then called
Little Poland, an area Southeast of the country that contained the city of Kraków. This was not a great time in Polish history. For 123 years, there was no autonomous state
known as Poland as an autonomous state, but then under Napoleon Bonaparte, the Duchy of
Warsaw was created in 1807 after the Poles fought alongside him. This was a client state of France but something
close to Polish sovereignty. But then Napoleon later failed miserably in
his invasion of Russia, after which European powers decided what to do with borders and
territories in the meetings known as the Congress of Vienna from 1814 to 1815. That saw the end of the Duchy of Warsaw, making
it so Poland was once again firmly divided into parcels owned by Russia, Prussia, and
Austria. The Congress Kingdom of Poland was created,
but it was under Russian rule. Then in 1830, there was the November Uprising,
in which the Russians eventually quelled a Polish rebellion, after which, in 1832, the
Russian Emperor Nicholas I issued the Organic Statute of the Kingdom of Poland. This was an attempt to erase any autonomy
the Polish had in Russian-occupied Poland. Meanwhile, there was widespread persecution
of Poles, sometimes referred to as anti-Polonism, which would last for centuries not only among
the three partition countries but, later, from the Germans and the Ukrainian nationalists. All this hardship has shaped how many Poles
feel about their nation today, especially the more recent tough times Poland faced. The country only regained its independence
in 1918, but then just two decades later, it was invaded from two sides at the beginning
of the World War. After almost six million Poles died by in
the war, and afterwards it became a client state of the Soviet Union. It’s thought Poland lost about 38% of its
national resources and infrastructure in the war, and while the Germans were supposed to
pay Poland back in reparations, that didn’t happen, or, at least, not as it should have. The Soviets ensured reparations came from
Soviet-controlled East Germany, so those reparations didn’t exactly look like a windfall. Poland not only went without these large reparations
from Germany, but it was also not part of the Marshall Plan, which was the US initiative
to help war-torn Western Europe. The Communist years were marked by almost
constant crises, often resulting in protests when the low standard of living was too much
for many Poles to take. There were numerous reforms, and there was
constant repression, although many Poles saw the light at the end of the tunnel when in
1970, Edward Gierek became First Secretary of the ruling Polish United Workers' Party. He promised to improve people’s lives and
partly opened Poland up to the West while allowing much more freedom of speech and expression
than those that had come before him. For many, Gierek’s era was the first time
they owned luxury goods, such as a car or a TV. He oversaw the construction of the now famous
Polish town blocks. He built the first highway in the country,
while creating and strengthening other industries. He built steelworks and glassworks, and under
him, the automobile factory that produced the famous Polski Fiat 126p was constructed. Poland was still poor, but life did improve
for many, and Gierek’s relatively liberal attitude compared to the leaders that had
preceded him was like breathing fresh air after living in a stuffy smokehouse for decades. Alas, Gierek borrowed a lot of money from
the West to fuel his plans, around $40 billion, which eventually brought an economic crisis
to Poland, and by the end of his tenure in 1981, sights such as people queuing around
the block for many hours just to buy a roll of toilet paper were a
People weren’t just broke. Many didn’t even have food, and there was
talk of uprisings. Poland’s GDP per capita in 1979 had been
$2,167, and in 1980, it was down to $1,595. Compare that to Britain where the GDP per
capita was around $10,000. In the US, it was $12,000. France had similar numbers, while Spain’s
was around $6,000, Portugal $3,300 and Italy $8,000. Poland was poor and it seemed like the country
could never get a break, something that might partly be driving Poland’s rise to power
now. Economic experts often talk about how GDP
doesn’t always tell the full story of how well people live, and that’s correct, but
in 1981, Poland was indeed an economic tragedy. People struggled to buy the most basic necessities,
the Police were highly corrupt, as were most other officials, and the regular working person
didn’t have much hope. The Rzeczpospolita Daily newspaper wrote that
in the summer of 1981, Poland was at the “bottom of the crisis,” stating that Warsaw was
so poor that the buses couldn’t run because there wasn’t enough money to replace tires. As food was rationed and people could buy
just a few pounds of meat per month, citizens took to the streets flying banners that showed
a black skull with a knife and fork crossed below. People shouted in unison, “We are tired
of being hungry!” “We are tired of queueing!” We demand life on the level of a civilized
country!” The New York Times wrote on July 30, 1981,
that “ANGER OVER FOOD SPREADS IN POLAND” and that there was a “new wave of unrest”
as people called out that they were hungry; they wanted bread; they wanted meat. They said they’d had enough of lies and
threatened that “the Hungry Will Eat the Authorities.” The government responded by implementing martial
law, blaming the food shortages on strikes. While not the response the protestors were
looking for, in some ways, this was a slight improvement, since in the decades earlier,
being part of a protest might have meant torture and a bullet in the back. So, this was Poland in 1981, a year before
much of the world watched “E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial” and saw how young
American kids living among pretty tree-lined streets didn’t seem to have much more to
worry about than their next bicycle adventure through their beautiful suburbs. And in those kinds of films, when someone
opened the refrigerator door, inside was more food than you could dream of. Poland was another world completely. Polish people wanted that reality… and now,
many of them have it. If you visit Poland today,, while there is
still poverty, of course, the days of food shortages seem to Poles like another world. There is a collective breath of fresh air
being breathed in, and this one is no flash in the pan like in the late 70s when the government
got so reckless with borrowing. The present seems like a new Golden Age to
those that suffered through wars and Communism. Meanwhile, news media in the UK is saying
Poland will soon overtake the UK as a major European power. This is huge if it’s true. We are talking about a country that had the
biggest empire the world has ever seen being overtaken by a country that couldn’t even
feed its citizens just a few decades prior. And the UK’s decline and Poland's rise serve
as an comparison for each other, and show just how far Poland has come. As many Poles are now enjoying this relatively
good patch in their history, meanwhile in the UK between 1 April 2022 and 31 March 2023,
a leading UK charity said it distributed three million emergency food parcels, an increase
of 37% from the same period the year before. In what’s called the Cost-of-Living Crisis,
demand for food banks hit an all-time high in the UK. Sure, Poland has food banks too, but the difference
is that most people that use them, according to the European Food Banks Association, are
refugees. In the UK, it’s the general populace that
is now unable to feed themselves, sometimes even with a full-time job. Hundreds of thousands of Poles emigrated to
the UK over the last 20 years, but now the British media is saying they’re returning
to their homeland in droves, a homeland now being called “the land of opportunity.” The Sunday Times said the standard of living
in Poland is improving, while British standards are declining. The cost of living in the UK is increasing,
as is the crime rate, as are waiting lines at hospitals. Is this an exaggeration? A recent article we found titled “Travelling
Across Poland Showed Me That Britain’s Economy Is Broken” described ugly and forlorn-looking
former industrial towns in Britain full of betting shops, pawn shops, and discount supermarkets. In larger cities, he found people sleeping
in doorways everywhere. He wrote, “OECD, using GDP per capita, at
purchasing power parity, cities like Warsaw, Poznan, Krakow, and Wroclaw are all wealthier
than Liverpool, Birmingham, and Manchester.” He said he found the difference in how much
better life was in Polish cities “immediately obvious.” What happened to the seemingly unsinkable
ship of Great Britain, and how did Poland manage to become so much stronger than it
had been in the past? Poland initiated major economic reform in
1989 when it transitioned to a capitalist market economy. Small and medium state-owned companies were
privatized, and the private business sector flourished, as Poland was viewed by its neighbors
as business-friendly. It began to receive a lot of Foreign Direct
Investment, or FDI, since it soon had a highly-skilled workforce and was cheaper than much of Western
Europe as a place to do business. The country soon became one of the world’s
so-called economic miracles. It was the growth champion of Europe, experiencing
better growth than even those Asian tiger economies such as Taiwan, Singapore, and South
Korea. Also, Poland managed to largely avoid recession
in the global economic crisis of 2008 and 2009. As the GDP for the European Union as a whole
decreased by 4.5%, the Polish GDP actually increased by 1.6% when the crisis was at its
worst. One of the worst countries hit was Great Britain,
which had for years banked on its, well, banking industry. It eventually became the G7’s worst-ranked
nation for business investment - quite the opposite of Poland, which focused on building
brainpower and business development. This was a country that in 1990 had a GDP
per capita of a paltry $1,731, which was minuscule when you consider Britain’s was about $19,000,
France’s at the time was about $21,000, and the US's about $23,000. Spain’s was around $13,000 and Portugal's
was $7,000. Poland was still poor, but it was about to
change those glaring GDP shortfalls. When Poland joined the European Union in May
2004, its economy was subsequently turbo-charged, and this wasn’t a result of flogging all
its natural resources or some kind of banking magic. The reason, as many economists have pointed
out, is Poland’s diversified economy and, more importantly, the brainpower of the public,
which has embraced entrepreneurship. The government promoted competition while
putting much emphasis on higher education. In 1989, only about one in ten young Poles
studied at the university level. Now it’s one in two, higher than the EU
average. In a study published by the Program for International
Student Assessment (PISA), it revealed that Poland was one of the leading countries in
the world regarding educational standard improvements. Poland’s PISA score for reading, math, and
science was one of the highest in the world at 12th place, behind countries such as China,
Singapore, Korea, Japan, Switzerland the Netherlands. The UK was down in 26th place, but it was,
at least, above Italy, Spain, and the US. PISA said Polish 15-year-olds are more functionally
literate than most of the kids in the EU and North America. The country has also become an IT hub. The European Commission recently made a list
of the strongest tech innovators in Europe, and Poland was placed in the Emerging Innovator
bracket. The UK didn’t even make the list. We’re not trying to pick on the UK here. It’s just the press has been talking a lot
about how Poland will overtake the UK as a power, so we’ve chosen the UK as a comparison
in which to judge Poland’s ascension as a power. Poland is now said to be a leader in the Central
and Eastern European region for greenfield investments, which are investments where a
company starts a new venture by constructing new facilities from the ground up, rather
than purchasing or leasing existing ones. Ranking as the third-best in Europe, its location
between East and West Europe hasn’t always worked out well for Poland, but now with its
much-improved transportation infrastructure, it’s in the perfect place to bridge developed
economies in Central and Eastern Europe. 94% of investors are reported to be willing
to re-invest in Poland, in part because it offers smart investment incentives, and according
to Statistica, it’s the most attractive country in the region in which to invest. It’s always a good sign for an economy when
foreign countries want to invest there. The Swedish battery manufacturer Northvolt
just opened Europe’s largest factory for energy storage systems in Poland. In 2023, Microsoft said it was impressed with
Poland’s IT scene and opened its first data center there, calling Poland the “newest
trusted cloud region” and the data center “the first in Central and Eastern Europe”
for Microsoft. Google has also opened a data hub in what
it says is Poland’s thriving IT industry. Poland is excelling in the area of aerospace,
which is evident when you look at its so-called Aviation Valley in the southeast of the country. 115 companies are working here, which employ
23,000 technicians, engineers, and designers. Other large industries in Poland are agriculture,
automotive, energy, defense, manufacturing, and tourism. Speaking of the latter, besides many cities
with outstanding architecture, Poland also has vast wilderness to be explored. It is home to Central-Eastern Europe’s largest
number of areas on the UNESCO World Heritage List. Poland has been one of the best performers
in terms of European tourism booms over the last decade. Poland is also described as a good place to
live in general. It now often makes it onto lists of best places
to live in Europe, with people saying you get good bang for your buck in Poland. If you look at various lists of countries
in Europe where expats and digital nomads are drawn to for low prices but high standards,
Poland generally is featured on those lists, which means drawing talent from the global
talent pool. Still, Poles earn less than Brits, on average. The UK, in 2023, had a per capita GDP of about
$46,000, and Poland’s wasn’t even half of that at about $19,000. France’s was $44,000, Italy’s $36,000,
and Portugal was at $26,000. Poland is still behind, but nothing like it
was in the recent past when its GDP wasn’t even a tenth of the UK’s, and if trends
are anything to go by, it will overtake the UK soon enough. We should add again though, that you can’t
look solely at GDP and know what life is like for people in a nation. Ireland has a massive per capita GDP, double
that of the UK, but only because huge multinational companies have operations there. A recent survey showed seven out of ten young
Irish people wanted to move out of Ireland because they believed they’d find a better
standard of living elsewhere. Wealth isn’t spread out equally, which is
why you have much of the UK currently relying on food banks, and millions of homeowners
are finding themselves priced out of life after what AP in 2023 said were “skyrocketing
energy and food costs stemming from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.” GDP per capita doesn’t always mean a lot. People are saying life in Poland right now
is better for your average Joe, or should we say Józef, than it is in Britain, despite
the GDP difference. This is a country on the rise. To understand the standard of living, it’s
better to look at what you get for your money, what safety nets are provided for you, how
well-educated you are, and what chance you have of flourishing in the workplace. You can also look at forums to get perspectives
from average citizens. We did just that, and one man said, “I’m
31, I’m born and bred in the UK, and I’ve recently moved to Poland. The first thing you notice is that you get
a lot more for your money in Poland.” He talked about how safe he felt; how inspiring
it was to see how proud people are to be Polish. He added, “Poland will afford you a much
better quality of life with plenty of surplus to spare.” Another poster said when comparing the two
nations, that in Poland you had “Safety, better food, better quality and better-educated
people, intelligent and beautiful women, great amazing and rich culture, better social and
inter-human styles, more polite and educated society on the main.” One more person wrote in Poland he found,
“Low cost of living vs a fantastically high standard of living. Great education, ok to decent food, great
travel locations, friendly people, lovely weather.” We don’t want to idealize Poland, and of
course these forums are to some extent self-selecting, but we found literally zero people who’d
lived in both countries that didn’t prefer Poland. This hope and pride the first person talked
about, which is partly related to that tough time we explained that Poles have had, count
for a lot when we are considering Poland’s present and future development. The British are suffering a confidence crisis,
a national disillusionment, and many people have lost hope in governance. A recent survey revealed 73% of those living
in the UK said they didn’t trust the government to help improve their lives, whether on the
right side or the left side. 56% of Poles said they distrusted their own
government, but 55% said they trusted the EU. The economic analyst Matt Klein recently explained
that things in the UK are worse than GDP per capita makes it seem. He said, “Take out Greater London — the
prosperity of which depends to an uncomfortable degree on a willingness to provide services
to oligarchs from the Middle East and the former Soviet Union — and the UK is one
of the poorest countries in Western Europe.” The same article explained that the U.K. has
become a “dark triad of deindustrialization, degrowth, and denigration of foreigners.” Considering per capita growth and productivity
growth per person, the UK is actually the worst in the G7 with its yearly decreases,
but Poland’s per capita growth has been increasing every year. It doesn’t mean as Poland becomes a more
mature economy, it will stay this way, but right now, the arrows are all facing upwards. The average growth in Poland is 3.6%, while
in the UK, it has hovered around 0.5%. If this trend continues, Poland will indeed
surpass the UK, while Hungary and Romania will do the same by 2040. Unlike Poland, the 2008 financial crisis hit
Britain, a finance hub, hard. The government decided to pursue a policy
of austerity, fearing debt while not focusing on productivity. Foreign exports declined, as did foreign investment,
while wages couldn’t keep up with inflation. Productivity hasn’t been this low in Britain
since the 18th century, and according to most experts, there are no signs of recovery at
the moment. Much of the recent concern in Britain came
when Labor leader Sir Keir Starmer said, “The British people are falling behind while our
European neighbors get richer, in the east as well as in countries like France and Germany. I'm not comfortable with that; not comfortable
with a trajectory that will soon see Britain overtaken by Poland.” He would say that, as he wants to blame the
people he wants to replace, but he has a point. With a large economy, a large military usually
follows, which can help to seal your standing as a great power, and Poland is no exception
to this. Yhe Polish government said in 2023 that it
would raise defense spending from 2.4 percent of its gross domestic product to 5 percent. The Polish Defense Minister Mariusz Błaszczak
said Poland is working toward having “the most powerful land forces in Europe.” Poland already has more tanks and howitzers
than its neighbor, Germany, and the country says it will have 300,000 troops by 2035,
compared with Germany’s current 184,000 and the UK’s 231,000. Poland presently has about 152,000 military
personnel. Meanwhile, according to the website Global
Firepower, while the UK has the fifth most powerful military in the world, how long can
it keep investing in its military if its poorest people can no longer afford to live in their
houses and buy their groceries? These people may not take kindly to being
told their military is expanding as they starve. That’s no exaggeration. Reports in 2023 said nearly one in five low-income
families experience food insecurity. Ten million British adults and four million
children engage in daily intermittent fasting, not because they heard it advertised on a
podcast, but because they can’t afford to eat. Just recently, Poland inked a deal with South
Korea to buy $13.7 billion worth of military equipment, including 80 K2 Black Panther tanks,
200 K9 Thunder howitzers, 48 FA-50 light attack aircraft, and 218 K239 Chunmoo rocket launchers. Poland also recently bought 250 Abrams tanks
from the U.S. and 32 F-35 fighters, all costing around $10 billion. The US also sold $4.75 billion worth of Patriot
missiles to Poland, adding to an approved anti-missile defense system. Poland also purchased 18 advanced combat High
Mobility Artillery Rocket Systems, or HIMARS, for $414 million. For the future, the two nations have agreed
to a $10 billion deal which will include 500 HIMMARS, 468 launcher-loader module kits,
45 M57 Army Tactical Missile Systems, or ATACMS, and hundreds of guided multiple launch rockets
and warheads. The US said this “will improve Poland’s
military goals of updating capability while further enhancing interoperability with the
United States and other allies.” With Russia next to Poland, the US is more
than happy to support Poland's aspirations of becoming the next big European power. Poland’s huge rearmament programs, including
a $2.4 billion contract for British CAMMs air defense missiles in 2023, tell us Poland
means business. The country’s defense budget has increased
to $30 billion, which at 4.25% of Poland’s GDP, is the highest proportion of GDP in all
NATO nations. Poland is looking to be the kind of military
power it was back in its Golden Age. A military pundit said that “No Western
country wants to scale up its military so much and so fast.” The former NATO spokesman Jamie Shea agreed
with that, saying, “Poland will become the strongest military power on land in central
and Eastern Europe.” If that’s true, with a strong military and
a leading GDP, Poland will indeed become a regional great power. The US will also help Poland with its new
nuclear energy plan, which will help Poland to start making more of its own weapons. Another pundit said Poland “looks set to
become Europe’s industrial as well as military powerhouse.” Let’s face it, Poland knows it must protect
itself, given what’s happened in the past. As it becomes wealthier and its people become
better off, they might not mind such hefty military spending. Considering Poland’s recent past, this is
quite an economic miracle. The question is, will it last? Even with all of Poland’s successes, many
Poles don’t trust what is reported to be their right-wing nationalist government. Just recently, hundreds of thousands of people
marched in the capital Warsaw saying their government has violated the constitution and
is eroding people’s fundamental democratic rights. These people like the EU, but they don’t
like the government, which they fear will turn into another autocracy. Even so, Polish people are flocking back to
their homeland. A reverse-brain drain is taking place, which
has seen them leaving the UK and other countries and returning to Poland, where they say there
is more hope for them. They’ve heard the news about the booming
tech industry and the fact that the World Trade Organization said in 2022 that Poland
beat countries such as China, India, and Brazil for growth in online services. The prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, said
not long ago, “Polish people are starting to realize that there are exciting opportunities
waiting for them back home.” In January 2022, Poland’s Finance Ministry
created the “Polish Deal,” which lured people back by allowing them to pay zero income
tax for the first four years after they’ve resettled. Poland is even attracting US software engineers. One of them said in 2023, “People in Poland
have more hobbies outside of work, whereas in the US, work is your life. People like to spend time with their family
more in Poland.” She said salaries in Poland are now catching
up to salaries in the US. Some British firms have now started setting
up operations in the EU since after Brexit; they say there are higher costs and numerous
new trading rules. It might seem ironic that some British companies
are setting up shop in Poland. A writer for an economy-focused website wrote
in 2023, “Poland is actively courting British firms.” But will things stay this way? Will Britain bounce back? Will the Phoenix of Poland proceed to the
heights of a European superpower? In a decade or so, could Polish people be
complaining about all the British immigrants trying to enter their country and take their
jobs? We can’t say for certain this will happen,
but as things stand, it’s not out of the realm of possibility. Now you need to see how the other half live
in Britain in “How the British Royals Actually Make Money.” Or, have a look at “How England Managed
To Invade 90% Of The World.”|||Poland is becoming an intimidating military
force in Europe and it’s making Putin sweat. A lot. And with good reason. Here’s the situation. The balance of power in Eastern Europe is
changing rapidly. Russia, the traditional leader in the region,
is in decline. Poland, on the other hand, is rapidly gaining
strength. In 2023, it is at its strongest standing in
the European balance of power since the days of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth in the
17th century, and it is currently engaged in a large military buildup that would see
it create the strongest fighting force on the Continent. For Russia, this poses even more problems
than those it has already dealt with in its weakening geopolitical standing. A strong Poland all but guarantees to put
a hard limit on Russia’s geopolitical ambitions in Eastern Europe and the Baltic Sea. Might we be seeing the beginnings of a purported
Thucydides Trap scenario in Eastern Europe, where a rising Poland causes fear in the Russian
leadership about potentially being displaced as the ruling power in the region? If war did break out, would the Russian military
be able to conquer Poland on its own? Let’s take a look at the balance of power
in Eastern Europe and the Baltic and how well Russia would do against a much-better armed
Poland. Poland and Russia have a long history of warfare,
with each prevailing over the other on numerous occasions. After the end of the Cold War and the fall
of the Soviet Union, Poland went on a spree of breakneck economic growth and joined NATO
in 1999. Starting in 2014, Poland began a big military
buildup. The country had previously been under the
NATO guidance of spending 2% of GDP on defense, but in 2022, it spent 2.6% on its military,
by NATO estimates. It is increasing its defense spending, too. In 2023, it structured its national budget
to spend 4% of GDP on its military, making it one of the biggest defense spenders in
NATO per capita. Poland can afford this. It has been Europe’s biggest economic success
story of the 21st century, with an average annual GDP growth rate of almost 4% since
the end of the Cold War in 1991. In a generation, Poland has gone from an impoverished
communist vassal state to a budding great power. That Poland would increase its defense spending
and military ambitions since 2014 is no coincidence. That was the year when Russia intervened in
the Ukrainian Maidan unrest, illegally annexed Crimea, and carved separatist territories
away from Kyiv’s control in the Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts. The Poles, who have a long historical memory,
understood what Russia was up to and prepared for a potential confrontation. As a result, the Polish military now is far
more capable than it was even a few years ago. In the recent past, Poland had been using
Soviet-era equipment that the Russian military also uses and is accustomed to dealing with. Such equipment includes tanks like the T-72
main battle tank and the fourth-generation MiG-29 fighter jet. However, Poland is now slowly but steadily
getting rid of this equipment, often through donations to the Ukrainian military. It is instead acquiring and training its soldiers
to use modern equipment, especially from the United States and South Korea. The new equipment includes an initial order
of 32 fifth-generation F-35 Lightning II fighter jets, to be delivered between now and 2030. Poland has also ordered 48 South Korean FA-50
light combat aircraft, which can operate in air-to-air or air-to-ground scenarios and
is ideal for helping transition Polish pilots to the F-35. For closer air support, Poland has purchased
96 American AH-64E Apache attack helicopters. Meanwhile, to defend its skies, Poland is
purchasing $5 billion worth of American Patriot air defense missiles and $2.4 billion worth
of British CAMM air defense missiles. Poland’s investment in creating a modern
air force and air defense system would pose the first big problem for Russia in any renewed
Russo-Polish hostilities. Russia has been unable to establish air superiority
in Ukraine, and Ukraine had a much less-capable air force and air defense network than the
ones Poland is now acquiring. Military experts expect that Russia will have
about two dozen of its newest fighter jet, the fifth-generation Su-57 Felon, in service
by the start of 2024. In 2019, Putin announced plans to have a fleet
of 76 of these planes in the Russian Air Force’s fleet by 2028. However, international sanctions placed on
Russia for its invasion of Ukraine threaten those plans because it is now far more difficult
for the Russians to acquire the high-tech components needed for their construction. The existing Su-57s have seen service in Ukraine,
but British intelligence reported that such service has been limited because Russian officers
fear losing these planes in operations. For an operation against Poland, the Su-57
would come in direct combat with the F-35, in the first-ever encounter between two fifth-generation
fighter jets. The Su-57 is faster, with a top speed of about
1,500 mph compared to the F-35’s 1,200. It also has a longer range, with a combat
radius of 930 miles compared to the F-35’s 590. The Su-57 is designed to be more maneuverable
than the F-35, thanks to its forward-swept wing design. However, the F-35 is harder to detect by radar. The biggest advantage that Polish pilots would
have over the Su-57 is in the number of planes that they have. Because of sanctions, development of additional
Su-57s for Russia may prove impossible, while Poland can continue to expect more F-35s in
its air fleet. The longer Russia waits, the more its disparity
is likely to grow. The Russian air fleet is much bigger than
Poland’s as a whole, with 4,036 aircraft between its army and navy as of 2023. In comparison, the Polish Air Force has only
275 planes in service. In an all-out assault, Russia should theoretically
be able to overwhelm the Poles through numbers, but the fact that it could not do this in
Ukraine raises questions about whether the Russians would be able to establish air superiority
against a more capable air force, and with time, the number and ability of Poland’s
aircraft will grow in comparison to Russia. The same principle also applies on land. Poland is in the process of creating a vast
army. It has plans to nearly double the size of
its army to 300,000 active duty personnel by 2030, which would make it the largest fighting
force in Europe. The Polish public supports this move. Enlistments in the Polish military have spiked
since Russia invaded Ukraine. As of 2023, the Polish army has about 189,000
total personnel. The Russian army is much bigger, with 3.6
million total personnel. Whether now or in 2030, the Poles would be
significantly outnumbered in a Russian invasion. Experts believe that between 100,000 and 200,000
Russian troops are stationed in the Baltic enclave of Kaliningrad, which is also home
to Russia’s Baltic Fleet and hosts nuclear weapons. The presence of Kaliningrad poses serious
geostrategic problems for Poland. The heavily-fortified enclave is only 240
miles north of Warsaw. Kaliningrad also sits a mere 40 miles away
from Belarus’ western border. This stretch of territory is called the “Suwalki
Gap,” and military experts consider it the most vulnerable position in NATO’s territory. A Russian offensive westward from Belarus
and eastward from Kaliningrad across the Suwalki Gap would, if successful, cut Poland off from
its NATO allies Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. While those three Baltic States would suffer
the worst for it, a successful operation across the Suwalki Gap would deprive Poland of some
supplies and military options. Meanwhile, a drive southward from Kaliningrad
toward Warsaw would force Poland into a defensive operation to protect its capital. Numerically superior Russian forces would
also be far more heavily concentrated in a Polish campaign than they had been in Ukraine,
with its much vaster territory. The dispersal of Russian forces across such
a large area was one of the reasons why the Russian advance at the start of the war did
not come as rapidly as outside observers originally predicted. Poland, with its more compact size, would
not have the same luxury. Most of the fighting would take place along
the narrower axis between Kaliningrad and the Belarussian border. Belarus’ cooperation would be needed in
these operations, but for all intents and purposes, it is a Russian vassal buffer state,
and leaked Russian documents from early 2023 suggest that Moscow aims to annex Belarus
by 2030. While Belarus did not intervene directly in
the war in Ukraine, it hosted the troops that attacked Kyiv, and it currently hosts over
9,000 Russian troops, with plans to build even bigger bases. Belarus would be forced to host Russian troops
for an invasion of Poland if the Kremlin really wanted to undertake the operation. Poland therefore has significant geographical
vulnerabilities that would aid the attack from Russian forces which outnumber them. Theoretically, this should mean that Russia
can take very heavy casualties in a drive on Warsaw from north and east and still win. One Ukrainian soldier fighting against the
Russians in Donbas in March 2023 said the following:
“The Russian mobilizational reserve is pretty much infinite, which means that they have
the luxury to make mistakes. They can lose a brigade or they can lose a
platoon, and some of those people are going to survive and they can share experience with
the new conscripts.” If Russia were to bring its full national
might into the war effort, with different waves of mobilization, the Poles’ numerical
disadvantage would become more pronounced. Poland’s population according to its 2022
census is about 38 million. Russia’s is about 147 million. However, as we have seen in Ukraine, the total
number of personnel in the military does not equally translate to combat power on the battlefield. Russia’s logistics problems were apparent
from the earliest days of the war in Ukraine, when it was operating on the border of its
own territory. Russian logistics for a war against Poland
would be even more stretched. The supply lines would be longer, as they
would need to go from the vast Russian interior, concentrate in Belarus, and then make their
way into Poland. Waterborne supply lines from St. Petersburg
to Kaliningrad would be shorter, but the balance of power in the Baltic currently greatly disfavors
Russia. The Baltic for all practical purposes has
become a NATO lake, especially with Finland’s entry into the alliance and Sweden’s entry
pending. These maritime supply lines would be quickly
disrupted in the event of a Russian war with Poland, even in the extremely unlikely scenario
that NATO does not honor Article V commitments. Russian forces operating from Kaliningrad
would therefore be difficult to supply unless the Russian offensive can create a land bridge
from there to Belarus. Such a scenario would give Poland the opportunity
to concentrate vital resources to prevent the Russians from achieving their objective. Destroying Russian supply lines and command
and control centers would slow the advance down and give Poland more time to mobilize
and counterattack. Fortunately for Poland, there are weapons
on hand which would help it in this strategy. Undoubtedly, military officials in Warsaw
had it in mind when embarking on their arms buildup. As of March 2023, Poland has purchased 18
HIMARS rocket artillery systems from the United States. Poland plans to increase the number of HIMARS
in its arsenal to 500 units. Ukraine has used HIMARS to devastating effect
against Russian forces. HIMARS is a highly precise delivery system,
and attacks on key assets like ammunition and fuel depots, command and control stations,
and other supply routes crippled Russian positions and allowed the Ukrainians to retake vast
swathes of territory in the late summer and autumn of 2022. HIMARS can come with a magazine of six MLRS
rockets, most notably the M31 GMLRS unitary, which can hit targets up to 70 kilometers
away. Poland’s HIMARS, however, will be even more
capable, because the Poles have made an initial order of 45 ATACMS missiles. These munitions have a range of 300 kilometers
and would offer the Poles excellent options in striking critical Russian targets. Presumably, staging points in Kaliningrad
and Belarus would be a high priority for Poland’s HIMARS systems and ATACMS missiles, especially
since the enclave would be difficult to resupply by sea. ATACMS can reach that far and Poland would
not hesitate to use its missiles in this way. The damage Ukraine did to Russia with only
a few dozen HIMARS systems and without ATACMS missiles would pale in comparison with what
the Poles could do with many more such systems and the longer range ammunition. Poorly-organized and supplied Russian forces,
which would need to operate further from their own territory to begin with, would prove ripe
targets for a hail of HIMARS fire, and HIMARS is not the only modern rocket artillery system
that Poland is getting its hands on. To supplement HIMARS, Poland is purchasing
South Korean K293 Chunmoo MLRS platforms. The first batch of 18 of these arrived in
Poland in 2023, and the Poles plans to increase the size of the force to 288. The Chunmoo, which was designed to counter
long-range North Korean artillery, can fire several types of unguided rockets with ranges
between 30 and 45 kilometers, guided rockets that can hit targets 80 kilometers away, and
a ballistic missile capable of strikes up to 290 kilometers. The Chunmoo launchers would put further pressure
on Russian supply lines and communications. In Ukraine, the Russians have adapted to HIMARS
by placing their critical assets further behind the front lines. They would try to do this in a Polish campaign,
too, but Poland will have longer range weapons between ATACMS and the Chunmoo-launched missiles. Additionally, Russian supply lines will be
longer, with less room for dispersal of critical assets because of the more compact front that
would come from a military confrontation between Poland and Russia. This is where Russia’s numbers might wind
up working against it, as more troops would be concentrated and vulnerable to rocket and
missile attacks. The Russians have also shown poor signals
security in Ukraine, which led to many HIMARS attacks on important targets. The Russian military has a poor command structure
and doctrine, with centralized control that discourages initiative in junior officers
and aggregates decision-making to commanders further from the front. MLRS attacks on supply lines and communications
hubs would therefore slow the Russian advance into Poland considerably, with confused masses
of Russian officers being unsure about how to act when not in communication with their
superiors. In contrast, Poland’s command structure
should be far more nimble and adaptive thanks to superior NATO doctrine, and better protected
against the problems that come from a top-heavy organizational structure. Heavy rocket and missile attacks against Russian
forces trying to establish a land bridge from Belarus to Kaliningrad would probably prove
effective in slowing the Russian advance, raising Polish morale, and causing chaos in
the Russian command. Poland is also investing heavily in modern
tanks to further bolster its ground fighting capability. 250 M1A2 Abrams, 116 M1A1 Abrams, and 1,000
South Korean K2 main battle tanks are on the way, while the Poles are slowly but surely
shedding their stockpile of older Soviet-era tanks like the T-72. The Poles are often donating this equipment
to the Ukrainians. Meanwhile, Poland’s current arsenal also
has more than 240 Leopard tanks which would find themselves comfortable among the modern
American and South Korean tanks set to arrive. Poland also plans on having a fleet of 1,000
of its native Borsuk infantry fighting vehicles, which are being designed to work alongside
the incoming K2 tanks. In total, the Poles’ armored forces will
dwarf anything else in Europe. For a country that has long prided itself
on its armored forces, the Russian tank units have done poorly in Ukraine. Almost 2,000 tanks have been destroyed or
abandoned there. Russia has also been hesitant to deployed
its supposed latest and greatest tank, the T-14 Armata, in Ukraine. In early September 2023, it withdrew the few
Armatas there, after supposed successful tests. The Russians might not have any choice but
to be less hesitant with the Armata in a hostile encounter with Poland. Unfortunately for Russia, there are only a
small number of Armatas in service – a test batch of about 40 was available in 2021, far
short of the 2,300 the Kremlin said it would have by now. Such claims were made a decade ago. Even if the tanks are as good as the Russians
say – and there is good reason to believe they are not – there are too few Armatas
to affect the course of a conflict, and with Western sanctions in place for the long haul,
it is unlikely that Russia would be able to build enough of the tanks to give it an advantage
over the modern tanks Poland is acquiring. The Russian tank force still dwarfs the size
of Poland’s in sheer numbers. Russia fields significantly more tanks than
any other country – up to about 12,600. However, only about 2,600 of those are main
battle tanks, and only about a quarter of those 2,600 are the T-72B3/B3M, T-80BVM, and
T-90A/M tanks that have modern fire control and sighting systems. Additionally, those are 2021 figures. Russia has lost many of its best armored assets
in Ukraine since then. These tanks will be difficult for Russia to
replace thanks to sanctions. Russia can break its archaic tanks out of
storage, as it has been doing in Ukraine, but these would be cannon fodder for armored
wave attacks to overwhelm the Poles through sheer numbers. On a narrow front, those numbers matter, even
though the Russians would take terrible casualties. Russia’s ace in the hole may be its preponderance
in artillery. The Russian army has always traditionally
been an artillery-centered fighting force. The Russian artillery corps has about 6,000
gun and rocket systems as of 2023. Poland is modernizing its gun systems with
plans to purchase 600 South Korean K9A1 self-propelled howitzers that can hit targets 34 miles away. Russia would have more artillery than Poland
in any scenario, but despite what they report about their artillery having one of the world’s
best fire-control systems, Russian gunners are often poorly-trained, inaccurate, and
following bad doctrine. The result is many wasted shots. This is why despite their firepower advantage,
the Russians have suffered many reverses in Ukraine and have been unable to translate
their artillery superiority into decisive victories. There is no reason to believe it would be
different in Poland. The narrower front might mean greater luck
for Russian artillery, but Polish gunners would almost certainly be more accurate shot
for shot than their Russian opponents. In any war on Polish territory, Russia would
have numerical superiority in the air and on land. With enough dedication, the Russians could
try to overwhelm the Poles with its sheer mass of personnel and firepower, but this
would be a costly strategy, reminiscent of the Winter War of 1939-1940, where the Red
Army’s wave attacks resulted in it suffering as many as ten times the amount of casualties
Finland took. The rapid modernization of Poland’s military,
Russia’s long supply lines and logistics problems, and poor doctrine and command structure,
mean that something similar could happen in a renewed Russo-Polish War. This would be the most probable scenario. Russia may win if it puts its full effort
behind the invasion, but its ability to project further power would become crippled in the
process. Or perhaps Russia’s logistics and command
would be so weak and Poland’s forces so much more effective that Russia gets stopped
in its tracks as it did around Kyiv, when its supply lines were inadequate even though
the distances involved were much shorter than would be the case in a Polish campaign. But what do you think? What would a war between Russia and Poland
look like? Let us know in the comments. Don’t forget to hit the like button and
be sure to subscribe for more military analysis from military experts!|||This number, 226, is the percentage increase
in the size of Poland's economy GDP per capita since the fall of Communism in 1990. In the last 30 years, Poland's economy has
grown more than tenfold,  which is genuinely meteoric. This makes it the most successful economy
in Europe during that time,  recording an average growth rate of 4% in Europe. Poland is located between two rival superpowers,
Germany and Russia,  and it has had a challenging past. Just in the briefest of terms, Poland was
wiped off the map in the 18th century, and it was invaded from both directions, Germany
and Russia, in the 20th century. So, how has that longer-term history shaped
its present-day political and economic identity? Poland's rich history is a captivating journey
through time. It all began around 2000 B.C., with the emergence
of Poland's first civilization. However, the turning point came in A.D. 966
when the region's disparate tribes were united under the Slavic chief Mieszko, the first
ruler of Poland and the founder of the first independent Polish state. Fast forward to the late 1500s, Poland and
Lithuania joined together and formed a large, powerful commonwealth with elected kings. By the late 1700s, however, Poland had been
weakened by a series of wars with its neighbors. In 1795, it was conquered and divided among
Russia, Prussia (now Germany), and Austria. The once-mighty nation vanished from the world
map, its existence denied for 123 long years. After World War I in 1918, Poland was
restored as a sovereign nation. However, just 21 years later, Germany and
the Soviet Union attacked,  intending to divide Poland between them. This aggression marked the beginning of World War II. Finally, in 1947, Poland was re-established as effectively a satellite puppet state of the Soviet Union. A new phase of economic and social development
started under communism, which is arguably, in the long run, an economic failure. However, it didn't start that way. For better or for worse, one thing that Soviet
dominance in the area and the common rule of the Communist party did was industrialize Poland,  particularly in the mining and manufacturing sector. However, in 1989, when the Iron Curtain finally fell,  Poland found itself on the brink of economic collapse. It had a large, inefficient agricultural sector,
terrible roads, and rail links, and an economy no larger than that of its neighbor. A stereotype had been created for Poland:
a big, poor country with shambolic governments, dreadful roads, and eccentric habits. Old stereotypes die hard, but the facts paint
an increasingly different picture. By the grim standards of recent centuries, Poland has never been more secure, 
prosperous, or better-run. If becoming rich is challenging for individuals,
it is even more challenging for nations, especially for a nation that was nearly bankrupt. Out of more than 190 countries tracked by
the International Monetary Fund, fewer than 40 are considered wealthy or advanced economies. The rest are referred to as emerging nations,
and many of them have been in the emerging category for a long time. The last large country to enter the advanced
class was South Korea, 20 years ago. The next major nation likely to join that
club could be Poland,  an under-the-radar economic star. So, how did Poland become an unlikely island
of economic success? In the early 1990s, rigorous economic shock
therapy put Poland on the right track. Market-oriented reforms included removing
price controls, restraining wage increases, slashing subsidies for goods and services,
and balancing the budget. The cure was painful, but after a couple of
years of sharp recession in 1990-91,  Poland started to grow again. It has not stopped since and received a further
boost when it joined the EU in 2004. Since then, economic growth has averaged 4%
a year. GDP per person at purchasing-power parity
is now 80% of the EU average,  compared with 39% in 1990. Moreover, Poland was the only major European
economy that didn't experience a recession during the financial crisis. This was due to a combination of luck and
effective fiscal and monetary policies. Poland's flexible exchange rate for the zloty,
limited reliance on international trade, and low levels of household and corporate debt
also contributed to its resilience. This strong economic performance has elevated
Poland's extra weight in the EU, both economically and politically, making it one of the key
member countries alongside Germany, Britain, France, Italy, and Spain. However, Poland's economic success was made
possible due to its utilization of the industrialization legacy from the Communist era. By attracting foreign investments from Western
countries, Poland was able to stimulate its domestic production and integrate its economy
into global supply chains. As a result, Poland, along with its neighboring
countries in the Visegrad Group, has become a significant player in industries such as
automotive and electronics. Domestic firms in Poland serve as suppliers
to international manufacturers,  particularly those from Germany. Poland is following a path similar to the
Asian success stories by becoming a manufacturing powerhouse, even though this journey is more
challenging today. Manufacturing is declining as a share of the
global economy, and with China taking much of this shrinking pie, only a few 
major manufacturing nations are expanding  their share of global exports. This select group of around half a dozen countries
includes South Korea, the Czech Republic  — and Poland. First and foremost, Poland has made significant progress in establishing a favorable 
business environment. They have embraced economic reforms, encouraged
innovation, and developed a strong infrastructure that attracts both domestic and foreign investments. Poland's strategic geographical location at
the crossroads of Europe has also positioned it as a gateway for trade and investment,
which has further fueled its growth. Poland is the largest country in Central and
Eastern Europe and the 9th largest in Europe. 65% of its population is at working age, which
means a workforce of 22.7 million people. The combination of human capital 
and cheap skilled labor  attracts foreign entrepreneurs to invest in Poland. Each year, Polish universities 
produce 37,500 engineers,  ranking second in the EU after Germany. The presence of talented and well-educated
employees, along with a supportive environment for start-ups, has attracted the most Venture
Capital investments in the region. Additionally, Poland's focus on education
and skills development has helped cultivate a talented workforce, which is a crucial asset
in today's competitive global landscape. Since 2000, Poland has spent an average of
4.5% of GDP on education,  which is above EU average. It consistently ranks among the top five or
six in reading, math, and science out of 38 OECD countries, outperforming wealthier nations
like Britain, France, or Germany. This strong educational foundation lays the
groundwork for continued robust economic growth. Poles also work hard, on average 39 hours
per week, more than the notoriously hard-working Americans and well ahead of British, French
or German counterparts. One of the most important features of the
Polish economy is its large domestic consumer market, which makes up 61% of GDP. This exceeds the EU average and has similarities
with the US. Household consumption, driven by a robust
labor market and wage growth, is expected to continue as a key driving force for the
Polish economy. In terms of infrastructure investments, Poland
has been the largest beneficiary of EU funds, receiving €102 billion from 2007 to 2013
and €106 billion between 2014 to 2020. This has significantly benefited the construction
and real estate sectors, fueled by infrastructure projects and the expansion of global service
centers in Poland, with international companies such as IBM, Citi Group, Credit Suisse and
Capgemini  relocating part of their operations to Poland. It has also managed to tap into robust sources
of innovation in the 'New economy.' One of the fastest-growing sectors is video
game development. A report by the Polish Agency for Enterprise
Development has found Poland's video gaming workforce as one of the largest in Europe. The report, titled The Game Industry of Poland
Report 2023, highlights that the Polish games industry is growing consistently with record
numbers year after year. Currently, there are over 300 game developing
companies operating in Poland and over 20 are listed on the Warsaw Stock Exchange. However, the fact is that Eastern European
growth has heavily relied on capital  and expertise from the West. Foreign companies play a significant role
in Polish exports  and employ a large portion of the workforce. This means that profits are often transferred abroad,  which weakens the ability of domestic firms to scale up. Poland is setting records in terms of foreign
direct investment (FDI) inflows, and it is well-positioned to benefit from the global
trend of nearshoring supply chains. However, FDIs come with a double-edged sword. They stimulate growth but also reinforce reliance
on external sources and may discourage local investments in domestic economic capabilities. For instance, in the entire Central and Eastern
European region, only one company, the Polish state-owned oil refiner PKN Orlen, appears
on the Fortune Global 500 list. The biggest challenge for Poland's economy
is to avoid the middle-income trap and prevent getting stuck at its current level. Poles are not saving and investing enough
for the economy to transition from being Western Europe's primary subcontractor to one with
global, innovative Polish companies. Over the last 10 years, the average saving
rate has been only 21% of GDP, and the average investment rate has been 24% of GDP, both
below the EU average. The country currently allocates less than
1.5 percent of GDP to R&D, roughly half the Western European average. Demography is another concern for Poland's
economy. It has one of the lowest fertility rates in
the EU and continues to experience emigration. Approximately two million Poles emigrated
after the country's entry into the EU, with about half of them moving to the UK. Mass emigration was driven partly by unemployment
at home, which remained persistently high for many years, but it has now reached its
lowest level since 1990. Moreover, Poland faces a significant challenge
in transitioning to clean energy, as it has the most fossil fuel-heavy energy mix in the EU. If the necessary investments are delayed,
this could impact the competitiveness of the Polish industry, which has been the primary
driver of growth so far. Poland's booming economy plays a crucial role
in the EU's response to the war in Ukraine. Its strong economic growth in recent decades
has made investments in advanced military equipment like modern tanks and aircraft possible. Additionally, Poland's flourishing enterprise
sector and increasing demand for labor have allowed the country to efficiently accommodate
a significant influx of refugees. The ongoing historical events are unlikely to significantly impact 
Europe's balance of power. The European Union is primarily founded on
trade and economic interests, and Poland currently holds a peripheral position in this institutional
framework. However, it will require a genuine commitment
to nurture domestic economic capacities in the landscape of a globalized and fast-paced
economy. And in Poland, such a commitment is still
largely confined to the realm of political speeches and wishful thinking. But at least they carry their head high when
they go. These days Poland’s voice abroad once again
counts for something.|||﻿Poland’s military has been going 
through a massive transformation,   possibly resulting in it becoming the next 
number one military superpower in Europe,   and it’s making Putin’s blood run cold. 
After centuries of domination by foreign powers,   Poland freed itself from Communist rule in 
1989 and joined NATO a decade later. This   was a critical turning point not only for NATO, 
but for Poland itself, heralding the start of a   new era in Warsaw’s international relations. Long 
the plaything of great powers like Germany (and   its predecessor state Prussia), Austria, and 
Russia, which had partitioned its territory   several times and oppressed its people in 
numerous, brutal ways, Poland is now on the   fast track to becoming a great power itself. 
In the year 2023, Poland is stronger than   at any point since its glory days in the 
17th century, when the Polish-Lithuanian   Commonwealth dominated much of Eastern 
Europe, and it is getting stronger still. 
  Let’s take a look at this incredible evolution. 
How is Poland transforming itself into a   great power and what does it mean for 
that country, Europe, and the world?
  The entrance of Poland into NATO was a major 
geopolitical advantage to the alliance. 
  During the Cold War, the alliance struggled 
to contain the Soviet Union, as it and its   satellite states in the Warsaw Pact stretched 
westward all the way to central Germany. If it   so desired to move further west, NATO’s forces 
on the European Continent would be outnumbered   and the Communist forces could all concentrate 
on a narrower front in the European Plain.
  Poland’s accession to the Western bloc completely 
reversed this geostrategic situation. It was now   the new, post-Soviet Russian Federation that 
faced the geographical disadvantage, as NATO’s   forces could concentrate and Russia had a much 
broader area of the European Plain to defend   should war break out. Poland’s accession to NATO 
also cut Russia off from much of the Baltic Sea,   as its coastline forms part of a natural 
chokepoint with Sweden, which in 2023 also   has pending NATO membership. Put simply, on land 
and sea, Poland’s joining NATO was one of the   biggest geopolitical and geostrategic disasters 
for Russia after the end of the Cold War.
  However, Poland is no mere passive player in 
the alliance. It does not contribute to the   “free rider” problem in NATO that President Obama 
lamented in a 2016 interview with The Atlantic,   and his successor, President Trump, repeatedly 
brought up in bellicose ways in order to try   to get NATO members to pay more. Poland actually 
carries its weight in NATO’s collective security.   As of July 2023, it has spent 2.42% of its GDP 
on defense, well above the 2% benchmark that the   alliance considers its standard. This makes Poland 
NATO’s third largest defense spender by GDP,   after Greece at 3.76% and the United States at 
3.47%. Poland increased its defense spending from   just under the 2% benchmark in 2014 to the current 
2.42% over the course of the decade. Undoubtedly,   this was done primarily in response to a more 
aggressive Russia from 2014 onward. The Poles have   a long historical memory and do not want to be the 
subject of Russian domination ever again. Russia’s   full-scale invasion of Ukraine strengthened 
that resolve in Warsaw. Poland’s relative   level of defense spending compared to Germany’s 
estimated 2022 total of 1.44% has even prompted   many American lawmakers to propose strengthening 
the United States’ military ties with Warsaw at   the expense of Berlin. Some American policymakers 
have floated the idea of moving most of the   35,000 U.S. military personnel in Germany 
further east into Poland. A 2020 reshuffling   of some American troops from Germany 
to Poland, during the twilight days of   the German-skeptical Trump administration, 
was a potential preview of that process.
  Poland plans to do more, too. It has increased 
its defense spending to 4% of GDP in its 2023   budget. This would have it surpass Greece and the 
United States as the largest per capita military   spender in NATO, and put it at a level over 
twice that of many other longtime NATO members,   such as France, Germany, Italy, and Spain.
As the quantity of Poland’s military spending   has gone up, the quality has gone up, too. It 
can afford to spend a hefty amount of money on   top of the line military equipment because Poland 
has enjoyed breakneck economic growth compared   to the rest of Europe. It is one of the 21st 
century’s underreported miracle stories. Indeed,   since liberalization began in 1989, Poland 
has experienced more economic growth than   the highly-touted “Asian Tiger” 
countries like Taiwan, Singapore,   and South Korea. In effect, Poland has been 
the tiger of Europe in the post-Cold War era.
  Between 1989 and 2015, Poland’s GDP per capita 
based on purchasing power more than doubled and   reached 65% of the level seen in Western 
Europe. It was the highest absolute and   relative level of wealth in that country 
since the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth,   according to the Brookings Institution. As of 
2023, its GDP per capita is about $19,000.
  Since 1991, Poland’s total nominal GDP has 
grown by 126.35%, with an average annual growth   of 3.94%. Tellingly, Poland did not go into 
recession in the financial crisis of 2008-2009,   unlike the larger European Union which 
shrank by 4.5%. Poland’s economy instead   grew by 4.2% in 2008 and 2.8% in 2009. While the 
so-called “PIIGS” countries (Portugal, Ireland,   Italy, Greece, and Spain) struggled with debt 
crises and austerity measures at that time,   Poland continued ahead with its economic growth. 
The Polish economy shrank by 2.02% in 2020 at the   height of the Covid-19 pandemic, but it weathered 
the viral storm better than many other countries,   and bounced back incredibly strongly with a 6.85% 
growth rate in 2021. All of this speaks highly of   the robust and diversified economy that Poland 
has created in its modern, post-Communist era.
  Poland still places modestly in an absolute 
ranking of the world’s economies, especially   compared to its NATO peers. It has the world’s 
21st largest economy in GDP by 2022 dollars, with   a total of $688 billion. Still, the country’s 
economic growth has been such a success story   that some observers have estimated it will have 
a larger economy than the United Kingdom by 2030   if its current trajectory continues. Already, 
by GDP per capita at purchasing power parity,   major cities in Poland like Warsaw, Poznan, 
Krakow, and Wroclaw are richer than major cities   in the United Kingdom like Birmingham, Manchester, 
and Liverpool. Although Poland’s total GDP per   capita still significantly lags the United Kingdom 
at $46,000, for the Poles, the trend is their   friend. Their current GDP per capita is almost 11 
times higher than what it was in 1990, when it was   only at a level of $1,731. The days of the food 
shortages and lack of other basic necessities that   the Poles experienced under Communist rule, 
particularly in the 1980s, are long gone.
  The country’s prosperity can be measured in 
another way, too. After it joined the European   Union in 2004, hundreds of thousands of Poles left 
Poland to seek opportunity in the United Kingdom,   which as a fellow member of the European 
Union back then, was easy for them to do. Now,   the situation has turned on its head, as Poles 
who immigrated to Britain are now emigrating   and returning home for better opportunities 
than the sluggish British economy can afford   them. The Polish government is keen to hurry 
the process along. Its finance ministry has   created a program called the “Polish Deal,” which 
offers a 0% income tax for the first four years   to Polish emigres who decide to return home.
But Polish expatriates are not the only people   seeking a better life there. The situation has 
reversed so much that many British and other   Western European expatriates are moving 
into Poland, often commenting highly about   the good standard of living and economic 
opportunity there for an affordable price.
  Poland’s economy has become a hotbed for 
technological innovation and manufacturing,   and it has one of the most highly-educated 
workforces in Europe, with about one in two young   Poles having achieved a post-secondary education. 
Foreign tech companies like Google and Microsoft   are opening data centers in Poland. Meanwhile, the 
Swedish battery manufacturer Northvolt completed   its construction of its factory in Poland in 
May 2023. It is the largest factory for energy   storage systems in Europe. Poland also has 115 
aerospace companies working in what is known as   its Aviation Valley, an area in the southeast 
of the country that has a high number of pilot   training centers and industrial and scientific 
research facilities. About 35,000 people are   employed there among 180 different members 
that do about 3.5 billion euros in sales,   according to the Aviation Valley Association. The 
Association’s long-term objective is to make its   area one of Europe’s leading aerospace regions.
Poland’s post-Communist financial success is all   the more remarkable when one considers that 
its population is declining despite the huge   economic growth. Its fertility rate is only about 
1.4 births per woman, well below the 2.1 needed   for population replacement. By the end of the 
century, demographers estimate that Poland will   have a population of about 23 million people, 
only a little more than half what it has today.   With this in mind, it is possible that Poland’s 
leaders believe they need to build a top of the   line military now, while their country’s 
population and economy is at a high point.
  Either way, the wealth generated by its economic 
growth has allowed Poland to increase the quality   and quantity of its military. It plans to 
double the size of its standing army to   a total of 300,000 troops by 2035. It is also 
investing heavily in a modern technological and   capital-rich military with some of the world’s 
most advanced weapons systems. As part of this   process, Poland has deepened ties with the 
United States and South Korea in particular.
  First, Poland is creating a modern air fleet 
based on the fifth generation F-35 Lightning   II fighter jet. Its initial order is 
for 32 of these planes. Meanwhile,   Poland plans to rid itself of older Soviet-era 
planes like the fourth generation MiG-29,   which it is often keen to donate to Ukraine for 
the fight against Russia. Supplementing the F-35   is an order of 48 South Korean FA-50 planes, the 
first ten of which were delivered in July 2023.   The FA-50 is a light combat aircraft introduced in 
2005. The jet is capable of supersonic flight and   performing air-to-air or air-to-ground missions. 
Just as importantly, the FA-50 is one of the   world’s few supersonic training aircraft, making 
it an ideal choice to train Polish pilots to   operate the F-35. 96 American AH-54 Apache attack 
helicopters are also on the menu for the Poles.
  Poland is modernizing its tank and armored 
forces, too. It intends to buy 116 American   M1A1 Abrams tanks and 250 of the newer M1A2 Abrams 
tanks. Warsaw plans to supplement this force with   1,000 South Korean K2 main battle tanks. This is 
in addition to its own force of 1,000 Polish-made   Borsuk infantry fighting vehicles. Meanwhile, 
Poland is steadily donating the Soviet-era T-72   tanks in its arsenal to Ukraine. For the Poles, 
these old systems are no longer desirable.
  Poland is modernizing its artillery forces 
as well. The government in Warsaw is spending   $10 billion on the American HIMARS rocket 
artillery system which proved so devastating   to Russian forces in Ukraine in 2022. It has 
purchased 18 HIMARS systems as of March 2023,   spending $414 million on this platform, and 
this is just the beginning. Poland plans to   buy a total of 500 HIMARS systems from the United 
States, which will include 45 ATACMS missiles,   as part of a $10 billion deal. Considering how 
much damage only 16 or so HIMARS systems did to   Russia in Ukraine in the late summer and autumn 
offensives in the Kharkiv and Kherson Oblasts in   2022 – without the long-range ATACMS missile 
– this would be a formidable force for the   Poles indeed. Supplementing HIMARS are 288 South 
Korean Chunmoo multiple launch rocket systems.
  The Poles desire modern tube artillery systems 
as well. As part of this effort, they are in   the process of purchasing South Korean K9A1 
self-propelled howitzers. These systems have a   range of 34 miles. 600 of these platforms are now 
in the country. More are likely still to come.
  Poland is also buying about $5 billion worth 
of Patriot air defense missiles from the United   States and is spending $2.4 billion for British 
CAMM air defense missiles. Russian air and drone   strikes against Ukrainian cities and civilian 
infrastructure undoubtedly set off alarm bells   among government officials in Warsaw. Poland is 
creating a modern air defense network to ensure   the same does not happen to its cities.
Poland’s military buildup in size and   technological quality is rapidly creating the 
most formidable fighting force on the European   Continent. When completed, the 300,000 man 
standing army will be the largest in Europe by   number of boots on the ground. In size, readiness, 
and technological capability, Poland is set to   become the most militarily powerful it has been 
since its golden age in the Polish-Lithuanian   Commonwealth of the 17th century, which, the 
Poles will remember fondly. The Commonwealth   routinely defeated Russian forces. In fact, the 
Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth defeated Russia in   the early 17th century and even occupied Moscow, 
something that Napoleon and Hitler failed to do,   and a few only accomplished by one other fighting 
force – the Mongols. For a little while, the Poles   and their Russian Boyar collaborators installed 
the son of King Sigismund III of Poland as the   Russian Czar. This episode was in many ways the 
height of the Commonwealth’s power, but a century   later, the tide would turn completely, and Poland 
would cease to exist as a state. Poland’s new   military is a source of pride, a signal that the 
bad times of partition, occupation, and Communism   have finally been banished and Poland is retaking 
its place among the great powers of Europe.
  For the Poles, the 21st century military buildup 
and change in their country’s status is not only   a matter of pride. It is partially a 
matter of necessity, and for current,   not just historical reasons. Poland shares 
a border with the heavily-fortified and   nuclear-armed Russian enclave of Kaliningrad in 
the north. Russian figures show that about 100,000   troops are stationed in this tight area, but 
Western experts believe the number might be twice   that. Kaliningrad is also home to Russia’s Baltic 
Fleet. Furthermore, Kaliningrad’s presence along   the borders of Poland and Lithuania creates a rare 
weakness in NATO’s geostrategic position. This   weakness is known as the Suwalki Gap, the 40-mile 
corridor across the Polish-Lithuanian border   that separates Kaliningrad with Russia’s vassal 
state Belarus. A pincer offensive eastward from   Kaliningrad and westward from Belarus threatens to 
cut the three Baltic States – Lithuania, Estonia,   and Latvia, off from Poland and the rest of 
NATO by land. Poland would see heavy fighting   in such an operation. Meanwhile, Kaliningrad is 
only about 240 miles north of Warsaw. With such   densely-concentrated forces in the enclave, a 
strong military capable of meeting a potential   Russian offensive from its westernmost bastion 
is a matter of national survival. It presents a   demand for increased defense spending that NATO 
states further to the west simply do not have.   In effect, those countries can afford to be the 
“free riders” President Obama complained about.   Poland does not have that luxury. Its territory 
is the one that would be wrecked if a broader   war were to ever break out in Europe again.
Germany presents an additional demand on Poland   to increase its military readiness. For historical 
reasons, Poland was uneasy with the comparatively   warm relationship Germany shared with Russia prior 
to the invasion of Ukraine. This situation came   partially as a result of the former’s heavy 
dependency on Russian oil and natural gas.   The Nordstream Pipeline across the Baltic from 
Russian to German territory was perhaps the best   example of this chummy relationship. Undoubtedly, 
Germany and Russia’s flirtation called to mind the   Ribbentrop Pact – the non-aggression agreement 
between Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union in   1939 that partitioned Poland between them – among 
some policymakers in Warsaw. Poland’s military   expansion is a way to put pressure on the Germans 
to pay their fair share of NATO’s defense and to   remember who their true ally in the 21st century 
is. For now, the move seems to be paying off,   as Germany has declared it will increase its 
defense spending to the NATO benchmark 2% of GDP   in the wake of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. There 
are many skeptics who say they have heard this   from Berlin many times before, however. Warsaw 
probably has a disproportionate amount of them.
  Poland has also been a leading provider of 
military aid to Ukraine, with 2.48 billion   Euros worth. This is far behind countries like 
the United States, United Kingdom, and Germany,   but Poland’s aid is the third largest 
of any individual country in Europe and   disproportionate to its GDP. In contrast, the EU 
institutions have mostly provided financial aid,   rather than military. Ukraine’s defense is 
a necessity for Poland. The last thing the   Poles want is for Russia to get even closer 
to their border. Russia’s aims in Ukraine   are antithetical to Poland’s very existence.
For the United States, Poland’s rise to a military   great power on the European Continent is a most 
welcome development, to the point that Washington   is even willing to lend a hand in the process. 
In 2022, the United States Congress approved a   $288.6 million military financing package 
to Poland to speed its arms buildup along.   The stated purpose was to “deter and defend” 
against further Russian aggression in Europe.   The aid mutually benefits both countries. For 
Washington, containing Beijing’s ambitions in the   Indo-Pacific region is now the number one foreign 
policy priority, even with Russia’s invasion of   Ukraine. With Europe now only a secondary theater 
in the United States’ geopolitical strategy,   Poland’s military buildup is a much-welcome 
boost for America’s goals, as it will reduce   the European defense burden which has been so 
disproportionately carried by the superpower   across the Atlantic since World War II.
The American help is welcome for Warsaw,   too. Poland’s military spending comes at a high 
price tag – about 85 billion Euros’ worth on   new weapons by 2030 – and with risks to come at 
the expense of civilian projects. Inflation in   Poland is also running high, at 17%, and economic 
growth, though still high, is slowing. There is   a risk of resource strain with such high levels 
of military spending. However, the leadership in   Warsaw believes that the price of the arms buildup 
is affordable and of secondary concern. Jaroslaw   Kaczynski, the chairman of Poland’s ruling Law 
and Justice Party, summed up the mentality behind   this expansion in military spending in early 
2023 when he said: “it is better to be in debt,   and even have to make cuts to budgets in other 
areas, than to be occupied. Whoever has seen what   is happening in Ukraine should have no doubt about 
this.” Kaczynski, a former Polish Prime Minister,   is considered one of Warsaw’s leading power 
brokers. He was born in 1949 and remembers the   bad old days, where he was an active member in 
anti-Communist circles in Poland. He and other   politicians of his generation understand what is 
at stake and what needs to be protected. For them,   Poland’s ascendancy to a military great power is 
not only a matter of pride, but one of survival.
  Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and its numerous and 
varied war crimes there stirred both recent and   deep historical demons in Warsaw. The response 
has been to build a first-rate military that   will soon be without peer on the European 
Continent – if all goes according to plan. 
  But will it? What do you think? Tell 
us your opinions on Poland’s economic   rise and military buildup and what it means 
for European and world politics, and don’t   forget to hit the like button and subscribe for 
more military analysis from military experts!|||we love Independence Day the city is in all
of its colors everybody's out Liv we're going to go watch till 12:00 noon it's the one time
that bugle doesn't play the heal tune he's going to play the national anthem and a choir
is going to sing the national anthem at the same time and then there will be a military
parade later and a sing along in the Square we will meet our friends romec and gsha and
we will go for some nice Lun somewhere so this is our third year we've
been here for Independence Day last two years were bright and sunny but
not so lucky this year but as long as the rain holds off we'll be good it's the first
year it's the first year we've had a flag a big flag to wave look at gratka today hello oh it's 5 to 12 we met our friends and the choir is assembling right
at the last minute like I say normally on the hour every
hour we get What's called the he now that he blows this is the one time where a 12:00
he won't he'll blow the national anthem and then he'll do the hay now after afterwards
at like 5 [Music] [Music] 12 [Music] [Music] spe [Music] [Music] for [Music] for [Music] [Music] for [Music] [Music] [Music] for [Music] [Music] fore [Music] foree [Music] [Music] [Music] for [Applause] yes yes yes he is you see so it's 5 12 it's the only time you'll
hear it 5 minutes [Music] late it's a bit [Music] [Laughter] special so the festivities
have begun already [Music] oh my gosh is that a live [Applause] singer so there will be
songs and singers during the afternoon with a single along concert at [Music] 5:00 [Music] d you we go with him uh yeah let's go [Music] [Music] so we will March under florans gate
on the other side we will come out it will be the barin and then beyond the barin ymo
Square this is where people are headed to gather now that's the Baran all right now [Music] [Music] just [Music] up [Music] all [Music] look who we met we met Tom gu Tom guide krackov
the best guide in krackov Planet cracker recommends Tom guide catches uh is all over social media
Tik Tok kosam kraco the great great Facebook group and Tom guide krao on YouTube koham
koham krao [Music] [Music] spe [Music] can't want [Music] [Music] to [Music] come [Music] on [Music] for [Music] [Music] [Music] going [Music] [Music] oh [Music] [Music] [Music] [Music] l [Music] [Music] [Music] that [Music] [Music] cre8 [Music] [Music] oh [Music] [Music] [Music] guys [Music] [Music] [Music] up [Music] come [Music] hour [Music] [Music] [Music] w [Music] [Music] oh that's [Music] for [Music] my [Music] [Music] sh [Music] so it's over now everybody is coming back
to FL back to main Square coming so now we're at the main Square
we had a little bit of Independence Day lunch and there's a like last year there's a join
in singalong concert sadly the rain has come doesn't seem to have dampened the crowd [Music] any I lost everybody where' they go more people like [Music] year [Music] [Music] for [Music] yes [Music] I [Music] will suich cloth hole decorated lots of Polish Flags today blue and white the flag of krackow red
and white the Polish flag white and red the Polish flag white and blue  the crackl flag white and red Poland white and blue k [Music] another week or two and we'll see all  the Christmas all the Christmas [Music] stuff yeah super [Music] [Applause] [Music] forign [Music] [Music] [Music] J [Applause] [Music] [Music] for [Music] [Applause] [Music] for [Music] [Applause] [Music] [Music] for [Applause]|||good morning what's going on you 
guys welcome to the Gdansk Poland we are   super excited to be here we heard so many great 
things about this beautiful port city so we had   to come and check it out today we're going to be 
discovering if Gdansk is a worth adding to your   Poland itinerary we're going to be exploring 
the Old Town uncovering its history eating   some delicious food and seeing if the beaches here 
are worth a visit let's start with some breakfast so we arrived to Gdansk by a high-speed 
train it was super easy and convenient and   very nice actually it was a little expensive 
though it cost us around forty dollars a person   but there are cheaper options they were just 
sold out because we're traveling a little last   minute so book your ticket in advance all 
right anybody would go to this University   what are those is that like a study pod I 
have never seen anything like that before so hungry so we came to this restaurant manekin
it's basically a restaurant that serves   traditional polish Crepes I believe 
they're called nelesniki we'll   put the official name up on the screen 
oh look how amazing this looks we both   find Sammy thank you tell me that's not the best 
breakfast we've had in a long time this is so   good these crepes are just to die for they become 
ticketance definitely come here and have breakfast   I can't finish it  this little skinny girl always out eats me 
I don't know how it's possible but I wish I   had her genes Sammy last bite well done baby 
that's impressive I wasn't even close Bravo you are the champion it was so spicy oh my 
gosh my mouth my lips have like the Ring   of spice around them so good all right off 
the explore the little town yeah okay that   was such a yummy breakfast the weather cleared 
up the weather has taken a turn for the better I'm in trouble are you so mad at me no I'm not 
mad Tommy is so PO'd at me I'm not mad I should   have checked it's just as much my fault Tommy is 
so peeved to me because we're waiting on the tram   and he said what tram are we waiting on and I said 
number nine and number 12 and number six pass like   three times and he was like Sammy I don't 
think number nine is coming and I was like   looked at my phone and it was number six the 
whole time that's twice we waited for like   45 minutes but now we're hungry again which is 
perfect because we've been dreaming about these   Donuts here best in the world we're heading to a 
spot right now in Old Town to try them out we're   right outside of Old Town yeah so nothing 
a donut can't fix I'm so embarrassed though can you smelled Donuts yet yes it smells so good 
this is actually our first look at Old Town too the rose jam donut that I have been dreaming about 
since we had this in Krakow right oh my gosh and   it's warm the traditional polish donut that has 
rose jam in it and then it has like these like   fried orange pieces on top it is literally 
delightful um as good as you remember yes   this one's almost better because it's warm I'm 
not a donut person but these polish Donuts are   like the best thing I've ever eaten in my life 
oh you sent me to throw away the trash and I   come back and there's none left thank you for 
sharing the one bite with me I appreciate it guys so good beautiful voices well we're about to walk along is called the 
Royal way it takes about 10 to 15 minutes to   walk through old town but we're gonna take 
our time and see all those tops and sites   along the way it is around one o'clock and it 
is busy you guys very busy busy busy for a good   reason though like look how beautiful this is 
absolutely perfect let's go check out old towns   there's like tons and tons and tons of tour 
groups so I'm going to be Tommy's tour guide   so it was like we're gonna start with this do you 
know more than me about this do I know anything   on my sheet this is the Green Gate I 
think it's because at one point it had   green Windows did it have green windows at one 
point I'd buy it I can't see greens you could   pretend like that's green right now because 
of the green Windows it doesn't look great so if you guys have been watching any of 
our recent videos we visited so many old   towns lately this one might take 
the cake though all the different   colors of buildings even the buildings the 
little details so much artwork in there it   really stands out very unique so 
different what a stunning place so right here in the center of Old Town is one of 
its most recognizable symbols it is the Fountain   of Neptune now Neptune is the god of sea this 
was first erected in 1549 as the legend goes   Neptune got tired of all the people throwing in 
gold coins in the spouting wishing for luck and   Fortune so it took its Trident and crushed all 
those coins making them worthless and that's   how the drink here goldslogger got started it's a 
famous Vodka it's known for its tiny golden flakes beautiful music so this old town 
is very hectic there are so many   people here today too many but Poland 
is known for a vodka not a vodka the   Vodka all the vodkas I think they're like 
the biggest vodka selection in the entire   world so we need to relax a little bit 
so it's time to go try some Polish vodka oh this looks like a perfect spot doesn't it 
can't be with your best shot so I would enjoy   what vodka to get I'm not sure what's traditional 
he recommend actually getting a beer so we got a   local beer which is more your style anyway 
which is more of my style we're not used to   taking vodka shots that's for sure and Sammy 
got the vodka sour so I'm gonna try hers first wow that is so easy very lemony and 
sweet I hardly taste any liquor there but   it's delicious you're gonna love this babe just taking a sip cheers you guys   that we never drink liquor drinks and like 
like I've had more shots in the past two   weeks I've had in my entire life together 
that's true let's harm in one more I know oh so tart and good isn't it easy yes and it's so 
calm and relaxing in here so this other guy at the   bar was ordering these little shots so we decided 
to give them a try what was this like a lemon   a homemade homemade lemon drink thank you for the 
recommendation sir we appreciate it for you really   great thank you oh you're so sweet thank you 
and he bought us the drinks what a sweet gentleman he is   he did tell us that he had to take it 
as a shot though so cheers you guys oh that's so delicious I have no idea either so   sweet we'll have to buy him two 
more how many people is he with poor people so should we get 
six more to do it with him we come bearing gifts cheers thank you for the drinks we 
appreciate it nice meeting you guys good recommendation sir thank you we had to 
repay the favor to the gentleman who bought   us the two drinks I just love meeting people 
on the road right yeah that's okay that's why   it's my favorite thing about travel yeah it's 
always about the people not the destinations I   know that's so cheesy to say but it's the truth 
no it's true I found that when we're when I'm   asking people to take their photos or to be 
in our videos it's so nice if you do strike   up conversations with them and you get to know 
you know where they're from what they're doing   and why they're traveling what interests them it's 
just it's really cool it's my new favorite thing   to do so I hope you guys enjoy it as well yeah 
hey thank you man appreciate it have a good day this street is so different from the other 
Old Town just because there are so many   people like performing there are people 
with snakes like this guy holy cow is huge a lot of street performers musicians 
it is pretty awesome he's not scared at all selling selling pictures of 
snakes no more vodka for her so I had to go into three different places to 
find some coins because of all the performers   here besides the snake people there's a 
bunch of musicians and drummers I have   one ready to go now so drummer is a 
musician yes he is Sammy good call I was wondering if there was like a holiday or 
something going on here and so I looked up online   turns out this weekend is Saint Dominic's Fair 
it's actually lasts for three weeks at the end of   July beginning of August and summertime it's been 
around since 1260. 1260. yeah so it's like one of   the biggest open-air markets in the world along 
with like Oktoberfest and like one other thing hey Sammy it looks like an important 
building what do we got okay   hold on hold on hold on yes okay just make it our built in 1605. today it's home to the 
Academy of Fine Arts so it's an Armory of Arts check out how huge that church is 
so this is Saint Mary's Church it   is the largest Brick Church in the 
entire world and I think it has the   highest viewing platform in all the city 
so we're about to go hike up on top of it all right we've got our tickets head up 
the tower it was four dollars a person   400 no I'm never gonna make it this is so nice wow such incredible views up here it's definitely 
worth the climb others have the signs that   point out all the major buildings and 
sites here there's one that points out   the Gdansk stadium which hopefully we're 
going to show you guys in our next video oh just playing with you 
baby he falls for everything okay I think it's time for some food food time that's a good sign they have all these kegs I 
know okay so we found this little Brewery to   come eat lunch they're gonna have they have craft 
beers here and I think like a traditional soup   so that's what we're gonna eat I'm pretty 
excited we haven't been in a brewery in a   long time and they have a Session IPA I can't 
wait to try it it looks like a uh a hazy IPA   yeah a little bitterness just a tiny bit though 
very hoppy I like it and fruity I love it we did   forget to mention earlier that all those drinks 
the ones we got and the ones we probably bought   for the people outside for only eleven dollars 
a yummy bowl of soup all of the reviews here   just said to order the fish soup so that's what 
we did lots of Tomatoes vegetable a clear broth   and mussels and some fish in here actually it's 
very mild it's not like overly seasoned to be   honest it could use some salt pepper our waitress 
is so sweet she brought me an American pale to try   it's a little glass look how awesome 
this glasses interesting a little sour   I don't think Tommy enjoyed this cute little 
American pale ale as much as I did has a very   like tart flavor I like it for the main 
dish I ordered their duck here and pulling   on every menu we've been to pretty much at 
the nice restaurants they always have duck   as an option we have to get it before we leave it 
looks amazing look at the presentation of this   this in this beautiful it has Beet Root 
some apple some dumplings let's dig them that was a nice cut the meat is cooked perfectly I've had 
duck in such a long time I'm a huge fan   this is perfect another great lunch 
back to the sightseeing let's do it street it's called Amber street because 
I have so much Amber jewelry everywhere one awesome day exploring the old town here 
in Gdansk my favorite we've been to in   months won the beautiful city we have more 
things to show you guys though so we'll see   you guys tomorrow we'll show you guys some 
ruins and a beach so we just made it out   here to Westernplatte now this is on the first 
battles where World War II started it's only a   20 minute ride outside of Old Town only a dollar 
to get out here it's an outdoor Museum you can   walk through and it's free so as you guys can 
see they have these ruined buildings that they   sent stabilize that you can walk through you can 
really see the destruction from all the bombing as you walk through the outdoor Museum there's a 
bunch of information about the battle that took   place here it's also crazy to think about how the 
Polish soldiers held out against 10 times the size   of the German army they held out for seven days 
there's also memorials to all the Polish soldiers   who died here come to this open air museum see the 
memorial but also look at the beach you guys it's   beautiful Tommy and I actually have a beach near 
where we're staying and that we want to go to so we made it here to stogi beach who knew the 
Beach's hair Poland were so beautiful we have   not spent a day at the beach in so long you 
guys so we're very excited about this we're   in the weekend so it's pretty busy actually 
it's really nice though there's a couple   restaurants here on site as you walk in and 
a portable little coffee stand so we got our   coffees for today too Cheers Cheers so there's 
not a ton of people swimming so I'm assuming   it's pretty chilly but we're gonna test it out 
tell me well I don't do well with cold water bottled water so I have my essentials right 
here and a book Let's test out this water very   refreshing it's a good word what do you think 
it's like melted ice cubes for a fact I was   not getting in this water and now I know for sure 
when you gotta pee so bad you just gotta go for it and I'm so refreshed now that was 
really nice you wanna try it you sure   you don't want to try the water no way no way what 
do I just pick you up I would scream bloody murder I'm so glad we made it up to take a dance it was 
kind of out of our budget here during the summer   but you can see why the beauty of the town the 
amazing beaches and all the history so much to do   here too right oh yeah it's been a few days here 
it's worth your time if you're here in Poland you   can also and sorry I didn't mean to interrupt you 
but like another top tip is if it's too expensive   like we stayed a little bit outside of town the 
public transportation is amazing it's really like   it's like a 20 minute tram ride and that's for all 
over Poland it's super easy to get around yeah and   affordable as well made it much more affordable 
to stay here so we stayed for a few days which was   great thank you guys for watching we appreciate 
all you guys I'll see you guys in the next video||| Good morning, good evening, I'm UBA, UBA Żaneta, welcome to my channel! As you can see - we're outside again, we're in Tel-Aviv. My last video in which I was asking the Israelis what comes to their mind when they think about Poland became pretty popular A lot of you requested another video like that. Listen... If you asked me, I had to do it. I'm here, I'm in Tel-Aviv And after a year and a half we'll be asking the same question: what comes to Israelis' mind when they think about 
Poland. Let's go! This video has subtitles in Polish, English and Hebrew. If you don't see the subtitles on your screen and you're watching this video on the desktop Click on the settings icon located in the right bottom corner > click on 'Subtitles' and choose the language If you're watching this video on a mobile device, click on the settings icon located in the right upper corner > click on 'Subtitles' and choose the language. Good luck! First, I think about the Holocaust. I was in Poland, it's a really beautiful place that I'd like to visit Poland... Our family. Yes, we're both Poles, our family is Polish. There is a lot of people in Israel that are Polish. It is raised when it comes to origin  Poland? Unfortunately Auschwitz. My grandfather. Also a very conservative government that I quite support It stops the liberalism that sometimes exists in "too democratic" countries - You know this bags hanging around a shoulder? - Yes! - You should put it around here - I know, sometimes I do - So you're from Poland? - Yes, as you can see - Good answer - Amazing I think there is a beautiful nature in Poland: lawns, forests, amazing places to travel - Have you ever been in Poland? - Yes - Where? - I don't really remember, it was few years ago, I went there for a judo competition  I really enjoyed the atmosphere, the people, the culture. I think that besides the bad memories of the Holocaust and what the Jewish people went through there Today the culture there is amazing, there is a beautiful nature and amazing people  My origins, all my family is from Poland. That's the first thing that comes to my mind. It wasn't in the specific village, it was called 'Kremlic'(?). I haven't been there, but my grandfather came from there. This is what I know about Poland - I'm almost 100% Polish myself. We've recently seen a polish series on Netflix - Which one? - 'Sexify' - Ah, yes, 'Sexify' We watched 2 full seasons and we heard a lot of Polish. It was really cool to listen to what's going on in Poland nowadays. This is a country that didn't support the Jewish people during the Holocaust - quite the opposite. Not all the Poles didn't help, there were Poles that helped. But there were also Poles that didn't help. The majority, as it looks like, didn't help - but it's not accurate Something that can be illustrated - maybe yes, but in our historical education when we were young, Poland was one of the elements that cooperated with the Nazis  And supported them. This is why the stigma about Poland stayed until today But we don't live in the past, we live in the present and we look forward for the future. Let's hope that the relation between Poland and Israel will improve with time  And I hope that Poland will take responsibility for their part, even if it's partial responsibility The fact that they shun it - that's what caused most Israelis to doubt the Polish policy - Eurovision, they didn't win - Oh wow, a lot, there was the trip to Poland, my girlfriends went there at 11th grade My first nanny was Polish. She came from Poland and raised me until I was 10. My father's parents were born in Poland Poland is really my heritage Oh I like Poland because we live very close to Poland in Germany. We are very often in Szczecin and we have friends over there - That's nice! What do you like there the most? - It's part of the European Union so it's very easy for us and very helpful that there are no borders And we have similar history so there are a lot of things that are quite common for us  - At this moment Eurovision - The second place on Eurovision - Second? No! - The 5th? - Poland? No, no way! - So which place? - Twenty-something  - Solo, Solo! - Yeah, Solo! Poland - for me personally is very interesting because I've never been there, although I had a connection flight with a stop there. We intend to visit. Also I know one thing: nowadays a lot of religious Breslaw people love to go to Uman in Ukraine. It's hard for them to get to Kiev because of the situation. They go through Romania, Poland trying to get there - And I'd like to tell you that if you're Polish, you're very cute - Thank you, you both are also cute. - I'm happy that such a pretty girl is in Israel I'm half Polish, my grandmother and my grandfather were from Poland. First thing when I'm thinking about Poland: my grandfather had 7 siblings and my grandmother had 8 All of them were murdered during the Holocaust. One brother of my grandfather survived, also one sister of my grandmother  So obviously it's very complicated. We, Israelis, know Poland in the context of Auschwitz, concentration camps and the Holocaust Of course, many years have passed, Poland is a beautiful country, there are great people, we love the Poles And I know that now Poland is fighting for the history - how the Polish people will be remembered. I know it's very important for them To let you know - I'm on the Polish side on this matter: because I really think that it was all done by the Nazis. In fact There were Poles that cooperates with the Nazis - we need to remember that as well But it cannot stigmatise Poland because after all it was the Nazi Germany So as someone that half of his family was murdered during the Holocaust in Poland - I'm saying it was the Nazis, not Poles If my grandmother was alive, she would agree with me. She used to say that there were Poles that helped her - that's her memories There were people that cooperated with the Nazis unfortunately and there were a lot of Poles that helped the Jews - It's very close to us - She is a beautiful country and I really like Polin, they're sometimes nice and this is like speaking Russian - It is similar to Russian - Yeah - Yeah we can understand each others a bit Look, there is a song of Zohar Argov - Which one? - About a Moroccan and a Pole. Poland sounds good to me Something European... Poland... In my mind I see it more like Europe, no?  - Have you been in Poland? - No, never - So you're invited What comes to my mind? That every time people see her they say 'Poland' Fairytales, forest, wolfs... - Behemoth is a great band. Nergal was here last week - Yeah, we were there, and you?  No, I was working and I couldn't come, but my 3 children were there Holokaust, bad smell, not democratic regime, cold. Ofer, would you like to add something? Polish Jewry which is a very large and meaningful one in Israel. What left from it in Europe - came to Israel.  - Poland: camps, Holocaust - The trips to Poland Aaa Roman (sic!) Lewandowski, of course As you can see today we also got a lot of different answers, the opinions were diverse There are also a lot of people who are amazed by Poland and understand the historical context. This is very important in order to build bridges between us.  I hope that you liked this video, please live a thumb up, subscribe to my channel and click on a bell button - thanks to this you'll receive a notifications about new videos on my channel. You can also leave me a tip - under this video you'll see a 'Thank you' button, you can tip me as much as you wish, I'm grateful for every single tip You can also visit me on my social media - I'm mostly on Instagram, all the links are in the description down below Thank you for watching and see you in my next video. Bye!|||One thing is for sure A trip to Poland will never be boring Thanks to its incredible natural wonders, architecture, cultural performance And the tremendous Polish spirit that has survived throughout its history This Baltic Sea country is the perfect tourist destination for history lovers Its medieval castles, monuments,Jewish culture influence And World War II remains are why many tourists find this wonderful country fascinating Come with us And let's discover 10 amazing places in Poland  But before we get started  subscribe to our channel and turn on notifications  No.1 Wroclaw Wroclaw is a city on the Oder River in western Poland Built in the medieval period Poland's fourth largest city Is known for its Market Square Lined with elegant colorful townhouses  And featuring a modern glass-structured fountain Also in the square is the Gothic Old Town Hall Wİth its large astronomical clock The Centennial Hall auditorium  A UNESCO World Heritage Site With its giant dome and tall spire Lies across the river Another popular site is St. Mary Magdalene Church Built in the 13th century. This gothic cathedral was the main church of the city  And is one of the oldest temples in Wroclaw No.2 Zakopane  Although this city is known as a winter tourist town Zakopane offers many more year-round activities for travelers You will find everything from hot springs with a beautiful water park  To various cultural activities Zakopane is an exceptionally varied city Wholly dedicated to tourism With accommodation sites accessible to any traveler Another attraction of the place is undoubtedly  The Targ pod Gubałówką  This highly diverse market offer beautiful souvenirs And handicrafts from the region and vegetables and fresh food Also, if you're looking for deals in coats and snowshoes You cannot miss this huge outdoor market No.3 Tatra National Park Have you ever seen those beautiful landscapes on postcards? In this park You will enjoy stunning views worthy of a panoramic photo You will find incredible hiking trails Caves between snow-capped peaks And the famous Tatra Mountains  on the Polish side One of the main attractions of this place  Is the Morskie Oko lake More than 100 thousand people of all ages  Visit this lake throughout the year You can also visit the Wodogrzmoty Mickiewicza waterfalls They are about an hour away from the lake This park is the ideal destination for hiking enthusiasts Or people who want to get away from it all with outdoor activities No.4 Torun  Torun is one of the oldest cities in Poland This city is full of houses and buildings with gothic architecture Monuments that date back to the medieval age Thanks to the fact that it was  not bombed or invaded during WWII It still preserves excellent historical interest places for tourist You can visit the home of the most famous astronomer of the time Nicolaus Copernicus It is now a museum And you will learn a lot about his life’s work And the contributions he had made to science Take a walk through the city  and see the old town hall  Dating from the 13th century Nowadays, it is a museum where you can know everything relevant  To Torun and its history And if you are a bakery enthusia We recommend you to visit the city's gingerbread museum Have a fun recreating all the steps to make this delicacy! No.5 Krakow  Are you looking for a place where everyone knows your name ?  Well maybe not that intimate but the tourist friendly city of Krakow comes close  You can visit Market Square Also known as Rynek Glowny  The primary and social center of Krakow This square has been the protagonist of countless shows and cultural presentations So, if you are lucky You will enjoy one of them during your visit Pass by The Cloth Hall Known as the first covered shopping center in the world Another place of incredible beauty and architectural interest  Is the church of St. Peter and St. Paul Outside the church you will see twelve statues representing the twelve apostles Who stand as guardians of the church This beautiful city stands out for its color Beautiful architecture and great artistic expressions No.6 Gdańsk  It is one of the most beautiful cities in the country Gdańsk stands out for its history, architecture And excellent appearance The site was a battlefield during World War II So it had to be rebuilt from the ground up You will be able to get a hit of that dark time  As you walk around the city One of the mandatory stops  you must take here Is at Amber Street Known for being one of the most beautiful streets in the world Another notable area that you cannot miss is the Royal Route It’s a long street which once served as a path  for  ancient kings With their entourage and royal armies Your journey starts at the upland gate  Passing through the Main Town hall Touring the houses of the nearby neighborhoods This walk is a magnificent experience  And shows you a bir of the  history of Gdańsk No.7 Warsaw  For over 400 years Warsaw has been the capital of Poland The place was a victim of war And  it does not forget its past while moving with passion towards the future Its most fundamental tourist attraction is the Old Town Declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO In the Museum of the Uprising  you can learn the story of how this city  Stood up and fought against the advances of the Nazi army  And how it resisted the onslaugh of war Warsaw old town market is one of the most beautiful squares in Warsaw  And was once the center of its public life This square was built in the 13t century And now the constructions  surround it  Are from the 15th century One of the city's main attractions And its most emblematic symbol  Is the Little Mermaid statue A warrior mermaid is wearing a large shield And a sword Becoming the defender of the city When you travel here in the winter You most visit  the ice rink surrounding the statue  Of a warrior mermaid The Łazienki Royal Park is one of the most beautiful parks in Warsaw It hosts open-air classical music concerts And you will love the beautiful gardens  Royal, Belvedere, and Art Nouveau  Surrounding the large historical buildings inside the park No.8 Sopot  Sopot  is known as a seaside resort town With beautiful beaches A large pier And moves between a quiet life and sporty highlights The Grand Hotel is a huge building Located at the foot of the beach And is one of the oldest in the city A great attraction for its particular architecture  And its crazy design is Krzywy Domek homes It is a twisted shapes building that looks like something out of a cartoon Designed by architects Szotyński and Zaleski  Bohaterow Monte  Cassino Street  Is a street primarily dedicated to tourists You can walk without any difficulty through the souvenir stores Restaurants, cafes And clubs located along this street A quiet and comfortable walk  That takes you directly to the pier of Sopot No.9 Zalipie Village Are you looking for a colorful place to visit during your stay in Poland? Zalipie is the spot for you! Thanks to a local tradition that dates back more than 100 years You can find colorful painted flowers All over any surface of the rural town During your stay You may run into some locals Some of them open the door of their homes to tourists for photographs Take a tour of the Dom Malarek museum Or also known as the painter's house There, you can learn about local traditions  And art through a variety of paintings and workshops No.10 Crooked Forest  It is a forest of more than 400 pine trees  With something quite peculiar And its shape is bent as if they were the handle of a teapot That is why it has become a unique attraction of the Polish territory You can find it on the outskirts of Nowe Czarnowo village Very close to Gryfino There are many and diverse theories of why the trees of this forest grow in this way Some believe that it is something supernatural Others explain that old farmers In the middle of the growth of these pines Modified their forms to be used later   In the manufacture of hulls and boats Today, the mystery remains unsolved Which attracts the attention of tourists who visit this area This beautiful country has been through a lot But Despite it all The incredible impetus of its citizens has kept it standing Enjoy its delicious cuisine Which will make your taste buds explode Let yourself be carried away by the great history of this fighting country!  Discover its charming villages Main cities, mountainous areas And even beautiful beaches So pack your bags And experience the phoenix of Europe  Poland If you are enjoyed this video give it a like  And click subscribe  Thanks for watching  |||thank you [Music] good morning and welcome
to Krakow Poland Welcome to our first video in our polling Series today we are so excited
to be exploring in the city of Krakow getting our first impressions seeing all the sites
and eating lots of yummy food Krakow is one of Europe's Most Beautiful cities as you can
see look how Charming this place is the city has grown since the stone Ages which I think
is pretty crazy we are starting here in Old Town Krakow at the main Market Square This
Town Square is the oldest medieval Town Square in all of Europe This square is surrounded
with historical houses palaces and churches and is full of tons of people and has a great
energy I appreciate it the first sight we're gonna go check out is
at St Mary's Basilica it is a huge beautiful Church you see right in the main Square here
they have a trumpet that plays every hour on the hour so we'll show some footage of
that but we're going to go inside and check it out [Music] got our tickets for the church it was 325
a person let's go check it out [Music] that was pretty amazing right it's absolutely
beautiful inside they have this gorgeous altar the largest of its kind in Europe it is absolutely
stunning but honestly what I felt like the most like impressive part of the church was
the stained glass windows loved it okay good first stop so our next stop is this huge building
behind me here it is called the cloth Hall you can find handicrafts and souvenirs let's
go check it out [Music] so the clock haul was a little too crowded
for us there's so many people in there but if you want a Cuban air I guess that's the
spot to find it all right now I think it's only fair that
Tommy goes and sits and waits while I get my nails done you're dreaming right you're
dreaming look at these they need to be done my beard was getting a little long so much
fresher now I went to Gentlemen's Barbershop they did a great job highly recommend it here
so our next stop was supposed to be Val Castle which is absolutely beautiful there's a cathedral
up there as well but we actually went and saw it yesterday on our food tour so we'll
show you the highlights right now [Music] I love you guys I appreciate your time thank
you so much our food tour video will come out next week
so make sure you guys don't miss that beautiful couple you guys appreciate it so we just made it to Camelot Cafe it's a
super cute Cafe it has some old photo galleries some hand carved wooden figurines and it's
known for its homemade cakes so of course we ordered chocolate cake some ice cream to
enjoy with our flat whites coffee drinking go I took my first step this is actually really
good look how pretty this cake is comes with strawberries blueberries pomegranates topped
with almonds it looks so gooey and delicious tastes like a gooey homemade brownie looks
like the ice cream might be homemade too this is amazing Blue's up to the hype for sure after that delicious coffee we're heading
to Oscar Schindler's Factory and there's a museum there we're gonna go check out [Music] [Music] thank you [Music] [Music] foreign [Music] formative every room is like themed differently
I think my only negative would be that it was a little bit overcrowded so they should
definitely limit the number of people that go in there but give yourselves about two
hours you can do it Solo or you could do it with a guided tour honestly I might actually
if I was ever going to do it again I might do it with a guided tour just because like
it's heavy on the reading of information so to have somebody like give it to you and tell
you stories could definitely be a bonus you might get more out of it but definitely worth
a stop and now it is time to go get some food [Music] yeah all right that's nice thank you brother [Music] so we've come to this food truck street food
area to try these sandwiches so yesterday on our food tour we tried it so many yummy
Polish foods and we met this guy at a bar at our last stop and he was asking us like
what all Polish foods we had tried and we told him and he said we couldn't leave without
trying this sandwich right here so we came here and I got the spicy one with jalapenos
and Tommy got the classic and it's essentially like a pulled pork sandwich this is going
to taste so good after a long day of sizing so what's the name of the sandwich I think that was so good he made a good recommendation
oh my gosh this is amazing it's like a juicy juicy pulled pork sandwich but this is so
spicy this is actually phenomenal wow come get this if you come to Krakow this is amazing what an awesome day here in Krakow so many
things to see and do and what a beautiful city I wish we had more time don't miss next
week when we eat our way through the city thank you guys for watching we appreciate
all of you hope you have a good night foreign [Music]|||What's Poland like? My name is Krystyna. I live here in Warsaw. Today you are going to learn all about the sights, smells, sounds, tastes and feels of Poland. Let me show you what Poland looks like. Poland looks like a fairy tale. The castles, the villages, the mountains, the forests. Being here is like being in a storybook. Poland looks like a painting. Here in Zalipie we paint our houses with flowers
that are inspired by our countryside. Poland looks like the high peaks
of the Tatras. Poland looks like rolling farmlands
through a train window. Looks like blueberry stained fingers. And a summer day in the Great Masurian Lakes. Visiting Poland
is like looking into the past. So much history has happened right here
and it's visible everywhere. One of the biggest events here in Gdansk
is St. Dominic’s Fair. Every summer, hundreds of artists,
musicians and craftspeople come to the city for one of Europe's
largest open air markets. Did you hear that? Every hour in Krakow, a commemorative horn 
sounds above the main square. To me, Poland
sounds like a shipyard on the Baltic. Gdansk is best known for its shipyard. Once the birthplace of a revolution, it's
still the coolest place in town. Poland sounds like the music of Chopin. Come and have a listen with me in the park. Poles love folklore and tradition. And of course, ringing bells. Poland tastes like the salt from Wieliczka Mine. When you're in Krakow, you must try an obwarzanek. 
The more poppy seeds, the better! Have you ever tried this? It’s called bigos and it’s a delicious cabbage stew.          One thing
you need to try in Gdansk it's Goldwasser liqueur with a real flecks of gold in it. Beer with raspberry syrup is a summertime speciality.  For something more refreshing,
try kompot - a classic beverage made from simmered fruits.  A holdover from the Soviet Union, milk bars are a uniquely Eastern European style 
of cafeteria/restaurant hybrid where you can get cheap home-style meals 
like barszcz and schabowy. There are many great desserts in Poland, 
but nothing beats a szarlotka in a mountain hut. Whatever the case, 
you can’t go wrong with jelly-filled paczki. And of course, everybody loves pierogi. Did you know that you can even have them
for dessert with fruit filling? Do you smell that? That’s the smell of the flowers 
in the Royal Gardens of Lazienki Park. In St. Mary’s Basilica, incense fills the air. Poland smells like wild mushrooms. Picking them could be our national sport. Poland smells like fresh brewed tea 
in a charming alleyway. Poland smells like a bonfire with friends. Poland smells like smoked cheese from a bacowka. You can find these smoke houses
all over the south of Poland. What does Poland feel like? Poland feels like the wind in your sails. Poland feels like Kashubian embroidery. There are seven colors.
Dark blue is the sea. Light blue are the lakes. The lightest blue is the sky. Yellow is the sun. Black is hard work of Kashubian people. Red is love. So the best thing in Gdansk is the amber. We call it the gold of the Baltic. It's collected right here on our coast. I love seeing all of the variations
and craftsmanship of this beautiful stone. Poland feels like the hot breath of a dragon.  Poland feels like walking through time. Poland feels like the thrill of discovery. Poland feels like a warm welcome. Welcome! Thanks for watching Lonely Planet. Like subscribe to see more videos like this 
from all around the world.|||On September 11th, US lockheed martin, the
maker of the famous himars rocket system, and the armaments agency of polish defense
ministry signed an agreement to procure and integrate himars launchers into polish military. It’s a deal that’s been in the works for
a year now, but has often been interpreted as not happening. Due to the ludicrous number of Himars launchers
requested. But now the agreement has been signed, the
whole deal is a step away from being realized. It has to be pointed out this is not yet the
final contract, but a framework agreement that’s been signed. Still, if and when the final contract is signed,
Poland will be getting a staggering four hundred and eighty six himars launcher loader module
kits. How is that going to affect polish military
power and how are those launchers gonna be used? Stay tuned. Welcome back. It’s important to say that the himars launcher
loader module kits are not entire himars launcher vehicles. But the launcher kits that go onto vehicles. That’s because the agreement stipulates
the launhcers are to be integrated onto polish built jelcz 6 by 6 trucks. This image shows off nicely the current US
made launcher vehicle with himars launcher, compared to the polish vehicle with the same
launcher. First deliveries of the new system, to be
called Homar-A in the Polish army, are to start in 2026. The agreement says tens of thousands of rocket
ammunitions will be produced. Those will not be the first himars systems
Poland will operate. IN 2019, Poland bought 20 Himars systems from
us. First of those were delivered earlier this
year. Those cost some 400 million dollars. While this new deal is valued roughly at some
10 billion. So if and when it all goes through, Poland
will be operating 506 Himars launcher vehicles. To just show how mind boggling that number
is - France is operating 9 MLRS vehicles. Sure, each has double the number of missiles,
but still. Even before all the army cutbacks, when France
ordered them at the end of cold war, France ordered just 57. The UK uses some 35 MLRS vehicles. Again double the number of missiles per vehicle,
but still, it's some 7 times fewer ready to launch missiles and 14 times fewer vehicles. Germany, another big European military, uses
33 mlrs vehicles. So is there someone in NATO who uses more? Sort of. The US army uses 368 himars launchers, same
ones Poland will be using. With the US Marine corps using 47 more. So Polish plans outnumber even the US current
numbers. But, the marines are in the process of getting
more himars launchers. They will increase the number of rocket artillery
batteries from 7 to 21. So, in the near future, sort of around the
time when Poland might start getting their local assembled himars, the marines might
be using some 150 or so launchers in total. That would get the US to a grand total very
similar to polish one when it comes to himars. With perhaps just a few systems more. The US army is also eyeying increasing their
numbers. Likely at the cost of other systems, as the
army currently also operates some 226 mlrs systems. A year ago, the army issued a request for
information to companies, asking who can produce up to 480 himars systems up to year 2028. That doesn’t mean the army intends to procure
that many but it does show interest in flexibility to get many new systems on a relatively short
notice. For now, including the MLRS systems, the US
army and the marines combined can be estimated to be aiming at fielding 740 to 900 rocket
artillery launchers, with a total potential of up to 54 hundred ready to launch missiles. So the US military is huge and it’s no wonder
it has way more equipment than other NATO militaries. But Poland, which is 35 times smaller economy
wise, is getting almost as many. It’s not just the 506 or so himars systems,
which basically matches the currently announced plans from the US, but Poland has another
multiple rocket launcher system in store. In September 2023, Poland also signed an agreement
with South Korean Hanwha to develop the homar-k system. That multiple rocket launcher systems is also
to use polish trucks and jointly developed launcher kits and missiles. It’s an addition to a previous agreement
which already saw poland receive the first korean K239 chunmoo system. 288 such systems will be produced for poland. It’s a heavier system than himars and carries
two 6 missile pods, sort of like the US MLRS. the truck carrying it is also a larger, 4
axle variant of the jelz truck, compared to the 3 axle truck carrying the himars launchers. Each pod can house either 239 milimeter missiles,
slightly larger than the missiles HIMars uses, which are of 227milimeter diameter. Or it can use a large ballistic missile instead. OR it will be able to use many smaller 122
milimter rockets, which will be produced in poland. South korean 239 milimter missiles are very
similar to us gimlers from himars. They use satellite guidance and have a range
of 80 kilometers. Now, all those are massive numbers and it’s
possible Poland will not go through will procuring both 500 us and 300 south korean systems. Just like the us army may not ultimately get
500 more himars. But it’s still looking like a possibility. If it does go through with it, Poland might
actually have both more launcher systems and more missiles ready to launch than the US,
come 2030 or so. Satellite guided artillery missiles like those
used by himars seemTo have proven their worth in last year’s operations, so its no wonder
many countries around the world are seeking more of them. Poland is just a very extreme example. Even if it ultimately doesn’t quite reach
US numbers, it’s on a course to field more rocket systems per capita than any other country
in the world. Including US, Russia and China. And do it by a wide margin. Will such numbers help Poland in future wars? That’s still unknown. Satellite guided artillery missiles are today
used like snipers. Perhaps firing entire salvo at once only when
the target is actually a sprawling set of high value targets or when enemy anti-missile
defenses are robust enough that a missile or two would not get through. With numbers mentioned for Poland, saturating
the enemy would hardly be an issue. There’s virtually no air defense network
in the world that could afford to defend against hundreds of such missiles fired at once. The issue might be jamming the satellite navigation
signal. That has occurred in Ukraine at times. But again, jammers are almost exclusively
ground based. And are not effective when missiles are high
up, nor far away. So its a means of somewhat degrading precision. Which can again be partially mitigated by
sheer number of missiles fired. Also, in war, frontlines tend to be long and
deep. No one can afford to cover all the targets
with jammers. More often than not, satellite guided missiles
would get through. Perhaps a bigger issue is one of target allocation. Having 500 launchers is great, but even if
just 300 are used actively on the frontline, that means 300 target sets are required, perhaps
every day, to fully utilize those launchers. There may not be enough high value targets
out there, daily. Certainly, Poland doesn’t have the recon
assets and target processing capabilities to find hundreds of targets per day, deep
inside enemy territory. So what may happen is that polish missiles
will much more often be used on the very frontline. For direct support against enemy bunkers,
trucks, trenches and so on. Called into action by forward units, and not
by some higher up command. That’s a valid choice too, sure, but at
that point one starts wondering if a similar effect could be achieved by using much cheaper
unguided rounds. Or even cheaper guided rounds, like for example
the excalibur tube artillery round. It’s also possible, though, that Poland
and US and in this together, where Poland will be the effector, firing the missile,
with the US being the party which finds and chooses targets. It still all depends on the number or missiles
available. Himars contract mentioned tens of thousands
of missiles. While that may seem like a lot, 500 himars
launchers can use 3000 in one go, in theory. The entire US army and marine corps had some
55 thousand missiles, before Ukraine happened. Current production rate, which is being increased,
is well over 10 thousand a year. But still, if Poland gets, say 30 thousand
gimlers missiles for their himars, that’s gonna be enough for 10 reloads. Possibly expended in a few weeks of a high
intensity war, given the number of launchers available. The US, before the war, had some 60ish missiles
stockpiled per launcher pod, enough for just 6 reloads. So it remains to be seen if Poland will really
be getting much bigger missile numbers. Still, Poland is surging ahead militarily. Missiles wise, it may even match the US. Or if the US goes a different route, it may
even slightly surpass it.|||The year is 1670. I was lucky to have been born
a noble in Poland, the most powerful country on Earth. Humanity has reached peak development,
nothing new is going to happen. What else could? I'd like for my peasants
to believe in themselves. How? Well... NETFLIX PRESENTS We're all headed for a disaster! Oh my God! This is the punishment for inventing
the telescope and peeping on God. A serious disease might have
made it to our village. Left-handedness? We expelled the leftie quickly enough,
it didn't take root. My name is Bogdan. My name is Maciej... Poland for Poles! I come from Lithuania. And Lithuanians. What starts with 'wh'
and calls the shots in Poland? I came to Adamville as part of the
Erasmus peasant exchange program. Wh-Jews. Wheat. Will you come to the dance tonight? You'll marry a magnate's son.
Period! Over my dead body! Slander! Slander! -Slander.
-Slander. People, wake up! It's the 17th century! Oh, what a time to be a woman! God, honour, and homeland are the top three causes of death
among Polish nobility. One of us was against. End of story.
This is democracy. I'll think of you when I shag her. It's not a problem.
But we will have to kill you. That is why I'm trying
to enjoy what I have. After all, somewhere out there,
children are starving. Like these peasant children right here. Poor, hungry kiddies. Oh, that's right. Lunch time! December 13th only on Netflix|||Poland has survived centuries of conflict 
to emerge as a proud, independent country,   ready to assume her new role in modern history. 
Visitors to Poland are discovering what the locals   have long known, that Poland is a country 
rich in fine culture, scenic landscapes   and extraordinary historical sites. Whether 
exploring the nation’s vibrant cities, the   lakes and forests of her picturesque countryside 
or some of the other tourist attractions, visitors   are sure to bring away rich memories. Here’s 
a look at the best places to visit in Poland: Number 10. Malbork. The medieval town of Malbork 
is best known for its castle,   which was built in the 13th century 
by the Knights of the Teutonic Order   as their headquarters, Europe’s largest Gothic 
fortress is named after the Virgin Mary,   the patron saint of the city and castle. The 
castle is actually three structures, making it   the world’s largest brick castle. It took 230 
years to build the castle, a majority of which   was destroyed during World War II. Fortunately, 
much of the castle has been restored since then. Number 9. Poznan. Student travelers wanting to meet their Polish 
peers might want to visit Poznan, long known as   an academic center and home to Poland’s third 
largest university. The city hosts many events,   including the International Theatre Festival that 
takes place every summer. Major sites are easily   accessible by strolling the Royal-Imperial Route, 
a walk set up especially for tourists. Athletes   may enjoy a visit to the artificial lake of Malta, 
home to a ski slope, ice rink, and swimming pools. Number 8. Bialowieza Forest. The Bialowieza Forest is a large remnant of the 
primeval forests that once covered much of Europe.   The forest straddles the border 
between Poland and Belarus,   and there are border crossings for tourists 
on foot or on bicycles. The Bialowieza Forest   is the only place where European Bison still 
remain free and living in the forest as they   once did throughout Europe. Wolves, Lynx, Elk 
and Wild Boar are among its other inhabitants. Number 7. Auschwitz-Birkenau. A visit to Auschwitz-Birkenau is a powerful 
experience that words can scarcely describe. The   immense size of the infamous Nazi concentration 
camp is the first thing to strike visitors   as they approach the entrance to the memorial and 
museum. Devoted to the memory of the murders in   the camps during World War II, Auschwitz-Birkenau 
has been visited by more than 25 million people. Number 6. Tatra National Park. Travelers who crave scenic beauty will find it 
in Tatra National Park, located in southcentral   Poland. Established in 1954, the park is mainly 
forests, meadows and numerous rock formations   covering the Tatra Mountains. Spelunkers may enjoy 
touring six of the park’s 650 caves that are open   to the public. The park also offers several alpine 
lakes as well as a 70 meter-high waterfall. There   is a similar national park in the neighboring part 
of Slovakia, also called the Tatra National Park. Number 5. Wroclaw. A charming place to visit, Wroclaw’s diverse 
influences have resulted in a unique look   and culture to the city. With Austria, 
Bohemia and Prussia all having had an   impact on the city’s development, the 
architecture reflects Wroclaw’s past,   as evidenced by the spectacular market 
square. Located on the Odra River,   the city has a plethora of bridges and 
lovely parks lining its banks, which make   it a picturesque place to relax – the delightful 
Cathedral Island is definitely worth stopping by. Number 4. Gdansk. Once known as Danzig, Gdansk is the largest city 
in northern Poland and its main seaport since   it lies on the Baltic Sea. Founded around the 
10th century, it has a mixed political history;   at different times it belonged to Germany and 
Poland, and was a free state before permanently   becoming a part of Poland after World War II. 
The city rebuilt itself after the war, restoring   its Old Town, which is famous for the Royal Road 
that Polish kings traveled on when visiting this   historical city. The city also is home to St. Mary 
church, the largest brick church in the world. Number 3. Wieliczka Salt Mine. Located on the outskirts of Krakow, the 
Wieliczka Salt Mine an incredible place to visit.   Opened in the 13th century, it was one of 
the longest and oldest operating salt mines   until it closed in 2007. The site features an 
underground city, all carved out of the rock salt,   including a chapel that is said to have the best 
acoustics of any structure in Europe. Dozens of   ancient sculptures carved from salt are augmented 
by new sculptures from contemporary artists. Number 2. Warsaw. The Polish capital of Warsaw has had a long, 
complex history, often marked by war and conflict.   It was very much damaged during World War II. 
However, it has been lovingly rebuilt to its   former medieval glory, with brightly colored 
townhouses making for a pretty – if slightly   artificial – place to wander around. There’s 
a mixed bag of architecture across the city,   including contemporary cafes and bars to discover. 
There are plenty of outdoor spaces to enjoy   and, with a lot of restaurants, it’s 
an excellent destination for foodies. Number 1. Krakow. This southern Polish city, close to the Czech 
Republic, is a former royal capital. There is   a beguiling mix of medieval buildings and 
modern-day, youthful nightlife to soak up   here. Krakow is known not only for its old town 
– complete with the 13th-century market square,   which is where you’ll find the iconic 
Cloth Hall, the grandiose centerpiece   of the square. The former Jewish quarter with 
all its synagogues is somber to walk around,   and many tourists visit Krakow to take a trip to 
Auschwitz – a haunting yet important experience.|||[Music] good morning and welcome to Warsaw 
we have made it to the capital city here in   Poland we actually arrived here yesterday 
by flixbus it took us about four hours and   costs about I think 21 a person we only 
have 24 hours so we are going to try and   see and do as much as we can today so 
we're here pretty early this morning   and it's super quiet and peaceful we kind of 
go back and forth on whether we like it like   full of people and has that great energy or a 
quiet and peacefulness of the mornings today   we're doing a very more quiet Vibe can you 
reach your water bottle over there thank you [Music]   so this is the famous Warsaw mermaid 
she's the emblem and guardian of the   city and she's been on the city's 
coat of arms since the 14th century looking awesome I like it 
thank you man I appreciate it it's so cute that was really really good orange juice 
was good breakfast was good solid choice we just made our way over here to Castle Square 
we actually did not know that today was a national   holiday police day so the entire square is like 
blocked off we still came to check it out it's   really really beautiful they have the statue of 
the king that made Warsaw the capital of Poland   Tommy shaken and said yes behind me so I guess 
that's a thumbs up for that fun fact [Music] we're heading up to the observation tower 
now to get a great view of the entire Square   I don't think there's an elevator 
so you actually have to work and go   up all the stairs to see the view Sammy found it [ __ ] what to say Sammy We're working to game 
today from 3 3 P.M so we'll come back at three   we'll come back at three with four so well because 
we have another fun activity planned right yes   we're actually going to a cooking class today so 
we're gonna go learn how to make some pierogies and it's life a little bit about this 
cooking class so we're taking it with   pierogi and more they have vegetarian 
and vegan options we chose just the   everything option I think the class is 
about two to two and a half hours and   we're heading over there right now to go make 
some pierogies I've been done a cooking class   well we haven't done a cooking class in so 
long I think since Asia I say I we because   I'm the one who usually cooks and Tommy's 
just behind the camera I'm the cameraman come out a month anyway we're heading to the class right now 
real quick we just wanted to say thank you to   better help for sponsoring today's video mental 
health is so important and it's really something   we don't talk enough about here on our Channel 
whenever Tommy and I are feeling overwhelmed   stressed or just maybe not feeling our best we 
like to take time for self-care self-care has   always been really important to us whether it's 
taking time to exercise or surrounding ourselves   with positive people or by doing therapy we've 
both done therapy over the years and we found   it so helpful in getting back on track mentally 
working with a therapist can help you become the   best version of yourself and really Empower 
you to take on whatever life throws your way   sometimes it's not easy taking that first step 
and asking for help but it really is always so   rewarding which is why we're excited to be 
partnering With Better Health betterhelp's   mission is to make therapy more affordable and 
more accessible which is so great because finding   a therapist can be hard especially whenever you 
are limited to the options in your area betterhelp   is a platform that makes finding a therapist 
very easy because it's online it's remote and   by answering just a few questions a better help 
will match you with a professional therapist in   as little as a few days so if you're struggling 
consider online therapy with Better Health you   can click the link in the description box below 
or you can go to betterhelp.com forward slash   samian Tommy for 10 off your first month now 
let's get back to the video every street you   turn down it's so beautiful here I know so we're 
actually we're staying like right in the heart   of Old Town so we're just like one block over 
and it's so pretty I think we made the mistake   in crack out of staying like 30 minutes outside 
of Old Town we didn't make that mistake again [Music] it's so nice staying in the city center 
we're so close to everything in Krakow   we saved some money and stayed about 
35 minutes out of town which don't get   me wrong the public transportation is 
super easy we rode a lot of buses and   trams and they come super often but just to 
be in the Ambiance the old city is [Music] who you share it with you how much water and how much 
flour we're gonna start preparing   the dough Maria's added some foil and 
we're gonna add a little bit of salt I forgot how much I enjoyed cooking classes 
like the atmosphere the energy it's just   so fun learning something new it's annoying 
even you're having so much fun yeah [Music] oh dough baby he's gonna sleep for a few minutes 
[Music] we're making the filling so everybody   here has like a different feeling that we're 
making and then at the end of the class we're   all gonna share so this is very exciting we have 
chicken carrots and chickpeas and Millie Xanax okay let me try it a little bit and then 
you see well if it's good I think it's good   perfect that's a good amount of peppers then we 
actually need to add a bit more so we have to   keep in mind that the dough itself it's kind 
of tasteless right oh so we kind of have to   compensate for that by adding more taste salt 
and pepper to the filling itself we think it's   salty and peppery enough but add more how much 
spicy yeah yeah go for it girl we love peppers [Laughter] [Music] we have rolls out our dough and now we're just 
like cutting out the little pierogies definitely   the little dumpling part should have got 
my nails done so that they look nice for   my close-ups the flower is covering you know 
yeah just get your fingers all flowered out look at that you guys got your first 
thumbs up okay so now we're rolling   The Dumpling she said she's going to show 
us multiple ways to roll the dumplings so   that way we only need to roll them one way 
each dumpling in one way a different way the most grand my way to do it and like 
also I think the easiest way you said this   way is the most traditional way or the way your 
grandma would make it let's see if I can do it   oh yeah I got it yeah this is 
the pinch and squeeze method I   really wanted I really wanted to 
make an aesthetic cooking video [Music] on the right side so once the water starts to Bubble we start 
to put the dumplings inside then you basically   need to wait two or three more minutes until they 
arrive on the surface when they all float on the   surface this is a sign for us to start counting 
two minutes it is now time to eat the fruits of   Oliver the dumplings of our labor I think we're 
starting off with a vegan the vegan kind and this   is a typical topping to put on it it's fried 
onions fried in super lowly for a long time   lentils carrots pepper I love how everybody made 
like a separate dumpling filling and we're all   trying all of them that's nice right little heart 
and I love the Newton the one made with love these   are the ones we made this is a mine and Millie's 
batch and we definitely added a lot of peppery is   it too salty he told you guys to add more sauce 
[Music] that's delicious but it's very salty foreign my heart just broke okay I don't think it's too 
salty I think that's perfect it's amazing YouTube   I feel a little guilty fell on the one who did 
not cook anything here but I still get to eat   living the good life okay did you have 
a favorite I think the best one was but with added salt with a little 
bit more salt it was better thank you hello you have a 
favorite mine of course yes we've all passed a special certificate I got my certificate and 
Tommy got an honorable mention he got certified   as well for being the cameraman cameraman so last 
but not least I'd like to introduce you to polish   is an alcoholic beverage that has been popular 
in Poland since the Middle Ages I'm not gonna   tell you what the taste is try to guess what the 
flavor is I'm thinking honey bunnies or banana I don't know I'm terrible I guess 
in games Okay so this little drink   is called nalefica it means to pour in 
so it's a traditional polish drinking okay [Music] we're collectively going to vote pero yeah correct that's right good job this one 
is Cherry look at the color everybody this feels stronger I think yeah maybe a 
pear I like the pair better now yeah all   around more like a summer drink 
to yeah well thank you teachers thank you [Applause] wow such a great cooking class I forgot how 
much joy that was bringing me we haven't done   one in such a long time I just love like the group 
atmosphere I was so glad whenever Millie showed   up and she was like my partner everything worked 
out great awesome teachers Maria was amazing Maria   was absolutely amazing the class was so fun and 
informative and very yummy and the little shots   at the end was a little extra little treat so 
that was super nice and yeah we're gonna go   back and finish exploring Old Town go up 
to the tower the observation observation   deck I think and get like the view over the 
city so let's go do that now [Music] foreign [Music] entering the old city the Barbican Plumbing what did you call this 
last night that's embarrassing barbition   things to do and Tommy's like oh we can 
go see the barbition so the barbition or   as some people call it the Barbican is it's 
now it's the bridge that connects the old   city to the new city we just entered 
in the old city let's go check it out no no no no no no no no [Music] no no no no well done you guys very talented as we 
were walking around yesterday everybody   had this soft serve ice cream it looks amazing 
we found the stop time for an afternoon to life cheers give me some of that 
chocolate so delicious and creamy okay round two let's see if they're open this time tickets were 10 slot each or two let's 
climb up all these stairs [Music] let's just   catch our breath before I walk out there 
and like it's a little busy isn't it this lady called Tommy Harry Potter with his 
wand and he's never given enough since then I   wish I was a wizard to be honest who doesn't his 
name is getting herself a lemonade I pass this   little sand I couldn't not get a lemonade 
too cute I know and it's hot so refreshing   are you from Warsaw yes it's cute [Music]   that's impressive we passed 
this guy like 20 minutes ago I like his tire that's my favorite part have a good day man is there a table yeah   oh beautiful spot overlooking the square I know I 
wanted to come back to the square because I don't   know it's just a picturesque with the buildings 
and the colors and the people I Love It Go and   join a local beer to end our day overlooking the 
main Square we had such a good time in Warsaw we   didn't have a bunch of time only 24 hours but 
we're so glad we made it part of our itinerary   the city's been through a rough history but it 
surprised you how charming and beautiful it is   don't miss it on your trip to Poland thank you 
guys for watching we appreciate you see you guys [Music] foreign|||There's a new military superpower dawning
on the European continent, and no it's not France, Germany, or even Britain. Poland has decided it's done messing around,
and is arming itself to the teeth- but why is Poland apparently preparing itself for
World War III. Russia's invasion of Ukraine has served as
an alarm bell for a Europe that for three decades was content to let the United States
do all its military heavy lifting- while naturally complaining endlessly about US militarization. However, the explosion of war in its backyard
has snapped European powers out of their comfortable post-Cold War victory naps, and suddenly the
continent has remembered that there's a serious military threat right next door and America
is still an entire ocean away. Forget the baguettes and berets, it's time
to start buying guns again. But Europe can hardly be blamed for dropping
the ball on their own defense spending. After decades of being prepared to wage an
apocalyptic battle for global survival, the west breathed a collective sigh of relief
and billions of dollars in military spending was re-purposed to civilian projects. Armies were demobilized, budgets slashed,
and a lot of military kit was either thrown into deep storage or donated to developing
countries. With the rise of extremism, European militaries
focused on waging small, regional conflicts with logistics handled almost entirely by
the US. The next major war would be won with hugs,
or simply not fought at all as Europe tried to bring Russia into the fold by deepening
trade relations with their cranky neighbor. Yet all Europe managed to do was give Russia
incredible leverage over them, because Russia wasn't done fighting wars to advance its national
agenda. When war broke out in Ukraine, Europe was
caught with its pants down- and despite having a combined GDP many times greater than Russia,
they cannot out-supply Russia inside Ukraine. Poland was quick to take note though, and
overnight the country went on a dizzying shopping spree for all kinds of new military kit. Poland has good reason to want to buy absolute
mountains of new tanks and other gear- and that is not an exaggeration. Had Russia's invasion of Ukraine been planned
by anyone more competent, Poland could have found itself at ground zero of a new military
struggle for Europe- and the major European powers could have done little if anything
to help the nation. Britain has been in decline as a military
power for decades now, with its military shrinking to half of its size at the end of the Cold
War. As an island nation, Britain's most important
capability is its ability to send expeditonary forces abroad, and yet during the wars in
Iraq and Afghanistan the British military got the nickname of 'the borrowers', for their
tendency of bartering for pieces of kit they were missing. Meanwhile their navy has been in significant
decline, with ships having to in effect be mothballed so their crews can be used elsewhere. In 2021 Britain's parliamentary Defense Committee
delivered a scathing report outlying significant problems with the Royal Navy, including a
critical lack of offensive capability and too few surface ships and submarines. Germany is facing its own significant issues. Maintenance problems from a lack of qualified
technicians as well as spare parts has meant that German pilots aren't getting the number
of hours in the cockpit they need to remain proficient. The country is also incapable of meeting NATO's
rapid response requirements without cannibalizing other units, leaving it in serious risk of
being incapable of fighting a protracted conflict. France is about the only European power to
maintain a significant military capability. We actually have little to criticize about
France, except that its expeditionary capabilities are still slightly lacking- but experience
gained in counter-terrorism operations in Africa is helping rectify the problem. We're not picking on Europe unfairly though,
the simple fact is that the continent has been coasting on the back of the US military
for decades. The Royal Navy prioritized retiring logistics
vessels as a cost-saving measure- why? Because any conflict they foresaw fighting
would involve the United States and its massive logistics capabilities. Germany retired much of its ground-based air
defenses- why? Because any war it would be involved in would
have assumed air superiority largely thanks to the United States. Since the Cold War ended, Europe evolved into
a power that would compliment US warfighting abilities, rather than be a battlefield force
of its own. Given the fact that Europe's favorite historical
pastime was mercilessly slaughtering each other for thousands of years though, this
may not have been such a bad thing. Poland has seen which way the wind is blowing,
and that it cannot rely on its European allies for national defense. The US military is the most powerful in the
world, but it's also half a planet away, and if history is anything to go by- and it absolutely
is if you're Poland- then by the time the US Army arrives in Europe in force, Poland
would already be a battleground. Perhaps no nation in the world is as cursed
as Poland, which has historically served as a convenient middle ground for major European
armies to batter each other to pieces. That's because the nation has basically no
defensive geographical features, allowing invaders to casually stroll right on in at
their leisure. Poland is done being Europe's punching bag,
and is aiming to field the most capable military inside of Europe. Polish Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki spoke
to the nation on the eve of its independence day, stating, “The Polish army must be so
powerful that it does not have to fight due to its strength alone.” Judging by the amounts of weapon orders it's
been putting in, this is far more fact than wishful thinking. Poland is raising its defense spending from
2.4 percent of their GDP to a whopping 5 percent- this is more than even the United States. It also puts its other NATO partners to shame,
who have largely struggled to meet the bare minimum requirement set by the alliance of
2%. This is a long-term commitment too, as the
country is determined to double the size of its military by 2035, from 150,000 to 300,000. Those troops are going to need combat gear
though, and Poland is buying it in spades. In exchange for sending 240 Soviet-made tanks
to Ukraine, the US cut Poland a deal for 250 Abrams, a significant upgrade to its land
forces. But the nation was paying very close attention
to the fighting in Ukraine, and made a direct bid to Lockheed Martin to buy around 500 HIMARS
units. This was an incredible order, and would have
made Poland as big an operator of HIMARs as the United States. Unfortunately the US was itself procuring
units to replace those sent to Ukraine and to make even more available to the country. Given that the war in Ukraine has been basically
one giant commercial for Lockheed Martin, it's no surprise that other nations were already
in line to buy the vaunted guided rocket artillery- with even the US wishing to beef up its own
numbers. With the US in effect sold out for the forseeable
future, Poland turned to South Korea for its guided rocket artillery need, signing an order
for 288 Chunmoo platforms (https://frontierindia.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/K239-Chunmoo-rocket-launcher.webp?ezimgfmt=ng%3Awebp%2Fngcb1). Similar to HIMARS only beefier, the Chunmoo
can carry twice as many rockets as HIMARS- though at the cost of mobility. With a significant standing army in the works
though, Poland believes the trade off is worth it- its rocket artillery will have to do less
hiding thanks to major investments in other areas of its military. This includes the air force, with Poland signing
an agreement to buy 32 F-35s. But Poland shocked the world when it once
more returned to South Korea for multiple military purchases- in effect, sourcing almost
all of its new purchases from the nation. Purchases include a fleet of 48 FA-50s. These are meant to replace its aging fleet
of Migs, and will compliment its inventory of F-16s and soon, F-35s. While Poland won't have a major air force
anytime soon, it's well on its way to being a significant threat to Russia should it ever
make the mistake of crossing into its air space. Beefing up its traditional tube artillery,
Poland is also buying 648 K9 howitzers from South Korea. This will make Poland one of, if not the biggest
artillery power in Europe aside from Russia- especially when coupled with its purchase
of 288 Chunmoo MLRS. By far the highest profile item on Poland's
shopping list though, and one that has really annoyed its neighbors, is the purchase of
nearly one thousand K2 main battle tanks. The K2 was indigenously designed by South
Korea, and is believed to be a highly capable modern tank. Its real capabilities are unknown though,
as the tank has never seen combat and the South Korean government isn't in a hurry to
make classified data public. Most observers however have full confidence
in the K2, though Russian defense analysts are puzzled by the design decision to not
have the tank launch its crew into orbit upon taking a hit from an anti-tank missile. The main concern raised by Poland's purchase
however is that the K2 was specifically built for a war South Korea expected to fight on
its relatively hilly terrain- a far cry from the flat European plain. How the K2 will fare here is anyone's guess,
and hopefully we'll never have to find out. Poland's South Korean spending spree has made
the two countries absolutely chummy, and that's something that's really annoyed the rest of
Europe. Home to many great tank manufacturers, Europe
is frankly puzzled at Poland's decision to purchase tanks from a nation half a world
away, specially when its logistics will depend on easily disrupted supply routes that literally
span the planet. But the decision makes a lot of sense if South
Korea plans to break into the global arms market, and if the nation builds maintenance
facilities inside of Poland itself. This will secure Poland's logistics needs
and open the door to the European arms market for South Korea, a deal that benefits both
sides. Germany has famously been the United States'
most important European ally, but now Germany has become nothing more than a logistics hub
for the American military. With the invasion of Ukraine by Russia, Poland
has now become America's most important European ally, and the relationship was cemented by
US officials commenting on the fact. Perhaps unsurprising given its proximity to
Russia, Poland was the loudest voice calling for Europe to aid Ukraine, and threw its doors
open to Ukrainian refugees. Its air fields and transport networks were
immediately made available to US and other foreign aid flowing into Ukraine, and when
a Ukrainian air defense missile landed in Poland and killed several people, the nation
put the blame squarely on Russia for necessitating the launch of air defenses by Ukraine in the
first place. Given Poland's history and tenuous strategic
position in Europe, it's no surprise that it's incredibly invested in the outcome of
the war in Ukraine. What is surprising however is the incredible
speed with which the country has moved to bolster its defenses, and the willingness
to work with the United States to arm Ukraine. Given its position inside of Europe, and the
military capabilities it will soon field, it's easy to see why Poland will soon trump
the rest of the European powers as America's most important ally in the region. What remains to be seen however is if the
nation will go through with all of its planned purchases- especially if the war in Ukraine
ends sooner than expected and the Polish population grows weary of the incredible price tags some
of these weapons come with. Now go check out NATO World War III Plan,
or click this other video instead!|||[Corey] Nestled away at
the crossroads of Europe lies a place that is quickly becoming the
newest hotbed for innovation. (dramatic, inspiring music) It's a place that knows
how to take action. One that moves quickly and
courageously in the face of challenges, daring to seize the moment where others might play it safe. A place where the entrepreneurial
mentality reigns supreme. This is Poland, a dynamic
land with a lot to teach us about the transformative potential of embracing change, reinvention,
and creating opportunity. [Tanya] I left for
Poland by war in Ukraine. [Corey] Here we'll
explore the powerful wins of innovation that have converged with the local customs, values, and ways of living to
create something unique. [Wojciech] We are not afraid to test, we are not afraid to speed up. [Corey] Together, we'll see firsthand how technology and tradition combine
to form Cloud Cultures. (inspiring music) [Corey] I'm Corey Sanders. I'm an engineer who
loves to build, innovate, and explore the new
frontiers of technology. In my time at Microsoft, I've seen a lot of innovation happen. I've seen plenty of good ideas fail and mediocre ones find ways to succeed. And I've realized innovation isn't as much about the idea as it is
the people behind it. Which is why I'm so excited to head out on this trip across
Europe to meet and learn from the people and the
companies driving our future. First stop, Warsaw. There's a fearlessness to what
I'm seeing come out of there. When it comes time to act, Polish people jump right in, courageously taking on new challenges, identifying opportunities,
building fast, embracing risk, and doing it all in a way
unlike anything I've ever seen. To get a better understanding, I connected with my colleague Marta Gasik. Hey Marta, how are you? [Marta] Hey, Corey. A data center lead and business strategy
manager based in Warsaw, someone deeply familiar with
the country, the culture, and the companies- like CCC Group, one of Poland's most
popular shoe retailers who went all in during the pandemic, using the lockdown and the
cloud to reinvent themselves. [Marta] Well, Wojciech, thank you so much for finding time to meet with us today. Personally, I've been a customer at least my whole adult
life, possibly a bit longer. But maybe you could start by introducing us a bit
about the CCC Group. [Wojciech] The CCC Group
is a fashion tech company. Basically, we started with
the brick-and-mortar business more than 10 years ago, and
then the company evolved. So, we have similar businesses in 28 countries, and we are speeding up. [Marta] The CCC I remember
from few years back was truly, as you said, brick and mortar. How do you leap so much into the innovation in such a short time? [Wojciech] Well, basically,
this is within our DNA. The COVID times was very
specific for the retail industry. So, the day when this store was closed, the day afterwards, we
launched more than 50 projects. We knew that we had to try
to find some alternatives. So our initial vision was to land within the full omnichannel space. So we started this journey four years ago so that the courage, the
technology, the willingness, and the team play that
drove us where we are today. [Marta] Sorry, you said four years? Like, four years entire
omnichannel journey. Like, it takes much longer from my experience on some other markets. [Wojciech] Well, basically
we started with the enablers. And the key enabler is agility. We invested in the cloud foundations on the very beginning of this journey, so we've been quite fast
within our strategy. We are saying widely and openly that we would like to be
like a data-driven company, not just in the customer domain, but we really now invest
and work a lot when it comes to the supply chain, when
it comes to the marketing. It's all about the data literacy, how fast the organization
is able to digest and to use the results. [Marta] And I think there's
something about Poland, just about our history, about the way we like to spin things off. [Wojciech] Yeah, because
we are not afraid to test, we are not afraid to speed up. If I were to say what is the characteristic of the typical company within this region, is the courage. We don't give up. [Marta] I'm looking forward to being a customer of your
omnichannel 2.0 with CCC Group. Thank you so much for sharing
the experience with us today. (Marta and Wojciech speaking Polish) (inspiring music) [Corey] It's amazing how bold moves and powerful tech can transform a company in such a short amount of time. And the impact it can have on people's lives is even greater. Something I want to learn
more about from Tanya, a Ukrainian refugee enrolled
in the CYBER Trainees program, a nonprofit providing Polish and Ukrainian women with
life-changing opportunities. We've got some pierogies here. (Corey and Tanya laugh) [Corey] Well, thank you so much
for making the time to meet with me. So what brought
you originally to Poland? [Tanya] I left for
Poland by war in Ukraine. I live in big city in Ukraine, in Kiev, because big city
opens up big opportunities. [Corey] You said you have a son. How old is your son? [Tanya] Six. [Corey] Six, okay. My daughter's three. Tell me a little bit
about what it was like growing up in Ukraine before the war. [Translator] I was born in
Ukraine in the Dnipro region. I went to school there, and when I finished
school, I moved to Kiev. I studied management
at a university there, and after I graduated, I got
married and started working for a Ukrainian
telecommunications company, gave birth to a son, I started a new job, and
then the war started, and I left Ukraine. [Corey] Must have been tough to move. [Tanya] M-hmm, yeah. [Corey] You know, here in Poland, what are some of the things about the culture here or the
people here that you noticed? [Tanya] I impressed for culture,
tradition, and language. [Corey] Felt like a home away from home? [Tanya] Yeah, yeah. [Corey] So you got involved
with the CYBER Trainees program. Could you tell me a little bit about it? It's a program for Ukrainian and Polish women who find work in IT. As part of the program, you know, what was the most enjoyable part? What did you really like about it? I'm attracted to cybersecurity. Oh, fantastic. Okay, and why cybersecurity? [Translator] I think that
nowadays, especially, it's very important to have some idea of what is true and what is not. Because today, there are
all kinds of disinformation, (Tanya speaking Ukrainian) and we have to somehow discern it for ourselves to feel more secure, and not subject ourselves
to some kind of danger. (Tanya speaking Ukrainian) [Corey] So, I mean, so impactful,
cyber security launched at Microsoft really focused
on keeping customers safe and making sure that they're protected. And so, I love that that's
the focus that you have. It's such an important part of IT. What would you say some of the experiences of some of the other women
has been in the program? [Translator] Our group was the best. We supported each other. We became friends. We still keep in touch and share our experiences and thoughts. We are very happy that there
was this opportunity for us, for Ukrainian women to take part in this program, because it
gave us a chance to move on. (Tanya speaking Ukrainian) [Corey] I mean, I'm just,
I'm so humbled to hear about the steps you've
taken, and I'm so impressed by how you're taking technology
to create empowerment to be able to change your life. When you look forward, what are the dreams that you have for you and for your son? (Tanya speaking Ukrainian) [Translator] The knowledge that I received during that project
makes me more confident about the future. (Tanya speaking Ukrainian) I lost my job in Ukraine, and now I have a chance to take my career in a different direction. So, we are happy that we
took part in this program. (Tanya speaking Ukrainian) [Corey] I would just say,
you're an inspiration and a role model, obviously for your
son, but also for many of us, and I'm honored to get
the chance to meet you and hear about your story. It's been wonderful. [Tanya] Thank you. [Corey] Tanya's story is a great reminder that technology alone
doesn't drive change. True change comes from
the people who use it as a tool to create a better future. On the other side of town, Marta's meeting with a local bank that is
disrupting the financial industry by embracing mistakes and
building a culture of empowerment. [Marta] Karolina, thank you
so much for having us today. And I must say, my personal
experience coming back to Poland after a few years living
abroad, I genuinely felt like I lept forward in time. The financial service
industry is so advanced, and Nest Bank is one of the best examples. [Karolina] And thank you for
such nice brief about us. Nest is a group, bank,
and factoring company. We focus on digital services. Our key market segment are small, and micro-enterprise
owners focus on solutions which save on time and
make their life easier. Therefore, all our services are around simple, usually innovative, but, most importantly, simple
and secure payment methods. [Marta] Is there any specific
part of your organization that is an innovation hub, or is innovation happening equally across all business divisions? [Karolina] Innovation happens equally. This is very close cooperation
of Customer Experience team, of Product team, of risk. On one hand, you need
the highest standards in terms of responsibility, security, but on the other hand, this is what customers would
like to happen, seamless, as easy as possible. And obviously the technology
will then make things happen. Like, we have implemented onboarding, on the cloud, and mobile
onboarding using selfie. [Marta] I've seen a selfie. You can open the bank
account any time, really, without any interaction. [Karolina] We say it
takes 10 minutes, however, on average, now we can see that customers do it in much less time. [Marta] I love it. I mean, that's the first
time I've ever seen any institution do
onboarding with a selfie. We talk about innovations, reinventing processes in
banking and interactions. That would require a
lot of changes, right? How do you build change
into your company's culture? [Karolina] First of all, we focus to attract the
people who are open-minded and open to changes. Definitely cloud is the technology which attracts talented people to Nest. This really happens. People would like to
learn the new services. It's easier for them to
invest time in innovation. When we have infrastructure
management automatized, it is attracting good people. But when you need to create the culture, you need to allow people to make mistakes. We have the strong need
to go in the unknown, to reinvent, to try again, to challenge the status quo, because maybe our nature, definitely this is great
benefit to have such people on board with such mindset. [Marta] Karolina, thank
you for having us here. (Marta and Karolina speaking Polish) [Corey] After three
eye-opening conversations, it's time Marta and I
regroup to share stories. And the location of our meeting
couldn't be more fitting: the new Microsoft datacenter here in the Polish Digital Valley. So, this is a unique
datacenter that we built here? [Marta] Yeah, actually in Poland Central, we have for the first time in any of our datacenters
worldwide, this new design. So, this specific one is called
Rapid Deployment Datacenter. We use more prefabricated,
preassembled components. [Corey] I see. Now we've rounded the corner, and we've got these giant
spaceship-looking things here. So what are these? [Marta] Those are actually
our water-retention tanks. [Corey] Ah. [Marta] Talking of innovation, you know, we actually optimize
our datacenters to work in much higher temperatures
than the industry average, which allows us to spend less energy, use less energy, on cooling
and adiabatic cooling, for example, is one of the technologies-adiabatic. [Corey] Adiabatic, okay. [Marta] Adiabatic cooling. [Corey] I think I got it. Now, we got a lot of time talking about how cool the datacenter is. But tell me, like, what
does it mean to you, what does it mean to Poland, to have this
region deployed here? [Marta] Oh, we're very passionate about the changes we can bring. Now, on some industries, it's not always that easy
to go to public cloud, and there is some preference
sometimes for data residency so, now we are making
the cloud accessible. [Corey] So I understand you
moved back as part of these plans. Like, what's really exciting for you about this launch? [Marta] Yeah, I've been with Microsoft on some other of our EMEA markets, and then, you know, coming home
for Christmas, just popping by the office and listening
to the leadership team here talk about the vision for Polish Digital Valley,
for our entire ecosystem here, how we can innovate, how we can change, how we can partner with
them for the future. I just wanted to be part of that. [Corey] That's awesome. Just the ability to innovate and be here with this type
of deployment to do that. You ended up talking to
a few customers, right? [Marta] I had a great
opportunity to have conversations with CCC and with Nest Bank. CCC, really interesting angle
on how our political history, the geopolitical history of Poland, forces Polish
people to innovate faster and to go for the process of change much quicker than
some other Western markets. One of the other customers we met with this week was Nest Bank. So Nest Bank is a Polish
bank that's digital first, and we talked about how the
choice to go cloud first few years back allowed them
to change how they innovate, how they better meet their customer needs, and how they quickened the time to market. [Corey] That's fantastic. [Marta] You've also had a chance to meet with, I believe, Tanya, right? [Corey] I met with Tanya, yeah. Very moving, really powerful story about her leaving Ukraine
and coming to Poland and joining the CYBER Trainees program, and the opportunity for her to empower herself
to build these skills and support herself and
her son in this new world. It was just, it was touching. I was very moved by her story. [Marta] Just constantly
reinventing yourself and going forward. Digital transformation
should not exclude anyone. [Corey] And exactly, I
mean, certainly having the infrastructure is
important, but having the skills and the community, and then
that drive for innovation, which of course, we've seen
in Poland, a whole lot of. [Marta] We're just giving tools to all of the hundreds and thousands of people who have the ideas for innovation. [Corey] Well, thank you, Marta, this has been really fantastic to talk. Even in the cold, snow weather here, it's been truly wonderful. [Marta] Thank you, Corey. We're so excited you had
the time to meet with us and see what Polish Digital Valley will really become in the next years. (dramatic, inspiring music) [Corey] As my journey through
Poland comes to a close, I'm struck by how much I've learned. I came with certain expectations, but what I discovered here has left me with a new way of
thinking about innovation. The cloud culture here is
quick, vibrant, and determined, filled with innovators who are focused on solving real problems and challenges. I leave here feeling energized and excited about the possibilities
of what we can all achieve with just a little bit of boldness. I'm ready to dive in to my next adventure. (upbeat music) [Man] I think it's in our DNA,
of Swedish people, to build. The Swedes, when they start a company, from day one, are building
it to grow outside of Sweden. [Corey] See you in Sweden.|||HERE, THAT'S ALL TO COME. LOTS TO GET TO. NOW, BECAUSE OF THE INTENSE FOCUS ON THE ISRAEL-GAZA WAR IN AMERICAN NEWS, OVER THE WEEKEND AND IN TODAY'S NEWS, YOU MIGHT HAVE SEEN, MIGHT NOT HAVE SEEN SOME BIG NEWS IN POLITICS IN EUROPE. A COUNTRY THAT HAD BEEN FLIRTING WITH THE PROSPECT OF MAYBE GIVING UP THEIR DEMOCRACY, MAYBE HEADING TOWARD A MORE AUTHORITARIAN FORM OF GOVERNMENT, SOMETHING MORE LIKE HUNGARY OR EVEN RUSSIA, HAS DECIDED NOT TO GO THAT WAY. IN POLAND THIS WEEKEND, THE POLISH PEOPLE TURNED OUT IN HUGE, HUGE NUMBERS. OVER 74% VOTER TURNOUT IN POLAND. THAT'S A BIGGER TURNOUT THAN WHAT WAS PREVIOUSLY THEIR MOST ELECTION EVER WHEN THEY VOTED OUT THE COMMUNIST PARTY IN 1989. THE POLISH PEOPLE TURNED OUT THIS WEEKEND IN UNPRECEDENTEDLY GIGANTIC NUMBERS, AND THEY VOTED OUT THE HARD RIGHT PARTY THAT HAD BEEN THE GOVERNING PARTY THERE. THE SO-CALLED LAW AND JUSTICE PARTY. AND SO IT'S JUST, WHETHER OR NOT YOU CARE ABOUT POLAND ITSELF AND ITS FUTURE, IT'S AN IMPORTANT THING FOR EUROPE. IT'S AN IMPORTANT THING FOR PARTICULARLY, SAY, THE EUROPEAN UNION'S SUPPORT OF UKRAINE IN RUSSIA'S WAR ON UKRAINE. BUT IT ALSO HELPS US GET OUR ARMS AROUND THIS LARGER INTERNATIONAL PROJECT THAT EVEN WE IN OUR COUNTRY ARE SUBJECT TO RIGHT NOW. WE HAVE SEEN AUTHORITARIAN ANTIDEMOCRATIC MOVEMENTS AND LEADERS RISE ALL OVER THE WORLD IN RECENT YEARS, INCLUDING HERE AT HOME. BUT THERE HAS BEEN ELECTORAL PUSHBACK. SOME NOTABLE ELECTORAL PUSHBACK IN IMPORTANT COUNTRIES. WE HAVE SEEN, FOR EXAMPLE, DONALD TRUMP VOTED OUT OF OFFICE IN THIS COUNTRY. RESOUNDINGLY IN THE UNITED STATES. 2020. WE SAW IN BRAZIL, VOTED OUT OF POWER. RESOUNDINGLY IN 2022. EARLIER THIS YEAR IN SPAIN, WE SAW THE HARD-RIGHT PARTY THERE REJECTED UNEXPECTEDLY BY VOTERS. NOW THIS WEEKEND WE HAVE JUST SEEN POLAND'S VERY HARD RIGHT LAW AND JUSTICE PARTY VOTED OUT. AND IT DOESN'T MAY NOT THERE ISN'T STILL RISING AUTHORITARIANISM AROUND THE WORLD BUT IT DOES MEAN IN INSTANCES LIKE THESE, IN BIG IMPORTANT COUNTRIES WITH MATURE DEMOCRACIES, WE ARE SEEING BIG VOTER PUSHBACK AGAINST TRUMP-TIME OR VICTOR LEADERS. WOULD BE AUTHORITARIANS DON'T GENERALLY TAKE WELL TO ELECTIONS VOTING THEM OUT OF OFFICE. THAT'S WHY THEY TRY TO UNDERMINE DEMOCRACY, FULL STOP. IN THE CASE OF JUMP AND JAIR BOLSONARO, WE SAW THEIR SUPPORTERS STORMING THE CAPITOL TO TRY TO KEEP THEM IN POWER AFTER THEY LOST ELECTION. SO EYES ARE ON POLAND NOW FOR ANY KIND OF POTENTIAL EVENTUALITY LIKE THAT, OR RULE BY FORCE SHENANIGANS TO TRY TO|||SUSTAINED. UKRAINE IS CRITICAL IN MAKING SURE THAT HAPPENS. >> PRESIDENT BIDEN SPEAKING LAST NIGHT ON "60 MINUTES" ABOUT THE WARS IN ISRAEL AND UKRAINE. >>> SBARLINTERNATIONAL SUPPORT F UKRAINE LIKELY GOT A BOOST YESTERDAY WITH POLAND'S CENTRIST AND PROGRESSIVE PARTIES APPEARING TO HAVE WON ENOUGH VOTES IN THE WEEKEND ELECTIONS TO FORM A COALITION GOVERNMENT AND OUST THE COUNTRY'S CURRENT NATIONALIST RULING PARTY. THE ELECTION DREW OVER 70% OF VOTERS TO THE POLLS, WHICH IS THE HIGHEST TURNOUT IN POLAND SINCE THE END OF COMMUNIST RULE BACK IN 1989. JOINING US NOW, U.S. NATIONAL EDITOR AT "THE FINANCIAL TIMES," ED LUCE. AND STAFF WRITER AT THE"THE ATLANTIC," ANNE APPLEBAUM. GOOD TO HAVE YOU BOTH THIS MORNING. >> ANNE, LET'S BEGIN WITH YOU. THE EXIT POLLS SUGGEST A WINNER FOR THE CENTRIST PARTIES BUT, OF COURSE, THE VOTES STILL BEING COUNTED. THE VOTES NOW DO SEEM TO BE LINING UP WITH THOSE EXIT POLLS. BUT EXPLAIN, IF YOU COULD, FOR PEOPLE WATCHING WHY THIS ELECTION WAS ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT EUROPEAN ELECTIONS OVER THE PAST DECADE. >> SO IN POLAND, WE'VE HAD FOR THE LAST EIGHT YEARS A NATIONALIST CONSERVATIVE RULING PARTY THAT WAS ESSENTIALLY TRYING TO CHANGE THE RULES OF POLISH DEMOCRACY, CHANGE THE LEGAL SYSTEM, CHANGE THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM, CHANGE THE RULES OF ELECTIONS TO MAKE SURE THAT THEY WOULD NEVER LOSE, ESSENTIALLY. THEY TURNED STATE MEDIA, WHICH IS VERY IMPORTANT HERE, INTO A PROPAGANDA TUBE, SPITTING OUT THIS VERY NEGATIVE, HARSH, ANGRY SMEAR CAMPAIGNS AGAINST THE DEMOCRATIC OPPOSITION. SO THE FACT THAT A GROUP OF THREE POLISH PARTIES, CENTER, CENTER LEFT, CENTER RIGHT, MANAGED TO WIN A MAJORITY AGAINST THIS KIND OF AUTOCRATIC POPULIST YUOU POPULIST LANGUAGE IMPORTANT FOR OTHER PARTIES IN EUROPE WHO WILL BE FIGHTING IMPORTANT ELECTIONS OVER THE NEXT SEVERAL YEARS. YOU KNOW, JUST BECAUSE AUTOCRATIC POPULISTS WIN DOESN'T MEAN THEY WIN FOREVER. THEY CAN BE DEFEATED, AND THIS IS AN IMPORTANT SIGN. REGARDING THE WAR IN UKRAINE, IT MATTERS BECAUSE THE RULING PARTY, IN A BID TO WIN OVER A KIND OF FRINGE NATIONALIST VOTE, IT BEGAN USING ANTI-UKRAINIAN LANGUAGE, VERY NEGATIVE LANGUAGE ABOUT UKRAINE OVER THE LAST COUPLE MONTHS, DESPITE HAVING SUPPORTED THEM PRIOR TO THAT. A NEW COALITION, LED BY THE CENTRIST OPPOSITION, WILL REALIGN ITSELF WITH UKRAINE AND CONTINUE TO FIGHT FOR UKRAINE, AND I HOPE, EVENTUALLY, HELP BRING UKRAINE INTO EUROPEAN INSTITUTIONS. >> ED, THERE HAS BEEN A BATTLE IN THE MIDDLE OF EUROPE FOR SOME TIME NOW, LED BY ORBAN AND HUNGARY HUNGARY. THERE HAS BEEN A BATTLE BETWEEN AUTOCRATIC POPULISM AND WESTERN DEMOCRACY. ANYBODY THAT DOESN'T BELIEVE THAT, JUST LISTEN TO WHAT ORBAN HIMSELF HAS SAID. HE HATES LIBERAL DEMOCRACY. HE CALLS HIMSELF AN ILLIBERAL DEMOCRACY, CALLS HUNGARY AN ILLIBERAL DEMOCRACY. POLAND, OBVIOUSLY, SO MUCH MORE SIGNIFICANT FOR SO MANY MORE REASONS. TALK ABOUT HOW IMPORTANT THIS ELECTION IS AND IF, IN FACT, TUSK ENDS UP RUNNING THE COUNTRY, WHAT THAT MEANS FOR WESTERN DEMOCRACY. I DON'T MEAN TO OVERSTATE IT, BUT I DON'T THINK I CAN OVERSTATE IT. >> NO, YOU'RE NOT OVERSTATING IT. I MEAN, POLAND IS, BY FAR, THE MOST IMPORTANT OF THE FORMER EASTERN BLOC COUNTRIES. IT'S THE LARGEST. IT IS FOUR TIMES THE SIZE OF HUNGARY. IF THE LAW AND JUSTICE PARTY HAD BEEN RE-ELECTED, AS ANNE POINTED OUT, IF THEY'D BEEN RE-ELECTED, THIS WOULD HAVE BEEN PROBABLY THE LAST RELATIVELY FREE AND FAIR ELECTION IN POLAND'S DEMOCRATIC HISTORY. I FITHINK THAT'S WHY YOU'VE HAD SURGE IN TURNOUT. THE POLISH VOTERS REALIZED WHAT WAS AT STAKE. THIS WAS THE ORBAN MOMENT. THEY'VE CLOSED DOWN INDEPENDENT JUDICIARIES, SNUFFED OUT INDEPENDENT MEDIA, USED STATE COMPANIES TO BROADCAST LAW AND JUSTICE PROPAGANDA. IT WAS NOT A LEVEL PLAYING FIELD. THE FACT THAT THE OPPOSITION PARTIES COULD HAVE WON ON A PLAYING FIELD VERY STEEPLY TILTED AGAINST THEM SHOWS JUST HOW MUCH THE POLISH ELECTORATE REALIZES WHAT WAS AT STAKE. THIS, I THINK, ISN'T JUST A BIG MOMENT FOR POLAND. IT IS A HUGE MOMENT FOR POLAND. IT IS A HUGE MOMENT FOR EUROPE, AS WELL. EUROPE HAS BEEN WITHHOLDING BILLIONS AND BILLIONS, 35 BILLION EUROS OF AID TO POLAND BECAUSE IT'S BEEN BREAKING ALL THE RULES OF THE CLUB BY PACKING THE COURTS, BY CLOSING DOWN INDEPENDENT MEDIA. THAT MONEY WILL NOW BE, ONCE A NEW GOVERNMENT IS IN PLACE UNDER DONALD TURSK, WHICH LOOKS LIKE WILL HAPPEN, THAT MONEY WILL BE RELEASED. POLAND WILL CEASE TO QUESTION THE ENORMOUS NUMBER OF UKRAINIAN REFUGEES IT'S TAKEN IN. IT'S PLAYED AN EXTRAORDINARY|||Polish President Andre Duda, thank you
so much for joining Bloomberg Television.
Your relationship with Vladimir Zelensky, who's also here for the UN
General Assembly, has been one of a friendship, a very warm relationship,
especially at the start of the war. This war has elevated you to really a
global statesman. You were this conduit between Kiev and
all these Western leaders that wanted to get into Ukraine and have access to
Zelensky. But lately, we've seen some friction
between this relationship, whether it's the grain issues transporting through
Poland, as well as the debate within your government about financial aid to
Ukrainian refugees that are in Poland as Wolinski comes to United Nations and
he's really begging the international community to still stand with Kiev and
that international support. Will he continue to have your support,
Poland Support, and at what cost to your own people?
Well, indeed it has been. It is the case that right from the
beginning of this war, this sense of this full scale Russian aggression
against Ukraine since the 24th of February 2022, total Polish policy.
It is Poland and the Polish people, maybe some of whom are those in the
closest neighborhood, have been helping most to Ukraine and to the Ukrainian
people, because it was us who, right from the start decided to open our
border and to take in millions of refugees from Ukraine.
In total, we had several million people coming through Poland.
2 million Ukrainians are still in our country.
But first and foremost, right from the start, we started to send armaments to
Ukraine. We have supplied more than 300 tanks to
Ukraine. We have also supplied almost all our MiG
29 jets, which we had. We sent more than 100 are motor vehicles
supplied state of the art howitzers , which we produce in Poland.
We also delivered we delivered a huge number of armaments and we have been
helping Ukraine all the time. This is also help which is given by
ordinary people in Poland who have taken Ukrainian refugees into their homes.
And we believed, and we still believe that it is necessary and we try to serve
as neighbors should do, those who help their neighbor, their brother, who is in
a difficult situation. So this is the situation that we have.
We understand it perfectly well. We try to do that.
But this is a war. And, you know, there are different
situations, difficult situations in a war, know in a war.
Also, normal life goes on as the one we have in our country.
There are different situations, difficult ones.
That is simple. But back to this green deal, where
there's a lot of friction at the moment. You said today that there will be a
legal solution at the WTO, but then you also said that it will be, quote, good
if Ukraine would remember that it does receive assistance from Poland.
And then you said that Ukraine should note it is a transit country, Poland.
Is that a threat to Zelensky? Yeah, it's on.
You know, this is not the point to lead any kind of discussion in the media.
Personally, I regret that there is a discussion going on in the media.
I will try to cut it off for sure, because somebody has to be wiser here
and the situation is not easy. Let me say one thing.
We try to help Ukraine. We have created transport corridors,
transit corridors precisely to transit Ukraine in green through Poland
to in the direction of seaport, be it Polish seaports or the seaports in the
Baltic states, to make sure that the Ukrainian grain can be exported wherever
it is needed, because we have got our own agriculture production in Poland.
And when Ukraine started selling its grain in Poland in a completely
uncontrolled way in autumn last year, when it turned out that suddenly we had
a flood of rain both on our territory, Polish farmers started to protest
because it really hit a Polish agricultural production.
And we also need to protect our own market.
We also have our own citizens and we have to care for their interests.
We want to help Ukraine. We transit.
We have a set of transport corridors. Right now there are more than two times
the volume of the grain which goes through Poland is two times as high as
it was in the beginning of 2023. We cannot allow ourselves that there is
Ukrainian grain sold without any control in the Polish market, the grain which is
much cheaper, which is not up to all the European Union norms and to all the
standards of the EU. And this is a gigantic, huge production
in a way I do understand it. It's easiest to sell it in grain in
Poland because we are close and the transportation costs are not big.
But Poland has got its own interests as well.
We also have our own citizens and we have to care for their interests.
We need to take care of them and. A pity that our Ukrainian neighbors did
not want a President Zelensky saying on Twitter.
He said today, Alarmingly, some in Europe play out solidarity in a
political theater turning green into a thriller.
He's not naming you by name, but clearly you guys are having a public spat.
Will there be a retaliatory measure from Poland this time this year?
We are trying to create, as I said, the best possible conditions to make sure
that Ukrainian grain can be transported to Poland.
Let me also draw attention to the fact that a problem is not only the problem.
Indymedia is being made out of this whole issue by our Ukrainian neighbors.
We are not the ones who are creating a problem.
We try to help them as much as we can. But it is just normal that every
authority has to take care of their citizens.
We are also democratically elected Polish authorities who were elected in
elections, and it is our duty to care for the interests of our voters.
I believe that here in the United States, not only all politicians, but
also all citizens who cast their votes in the elections of the Congress in
local elections and presidential elections understand it perfectly well.
This is what they also expect from their politicians.
This is what they expect from the American president that he will care
first and foremost for American interests.
It is my duty to take care, especially of Polish interests and the interest of
our citizens and compatriots, my fellow citizens.
This is what we are trying to do. We do have a problem
caused by Russia because it is Russia who is responsible for unleashing the
war in Ukraine. It was Russia who invaded Ukraine and it
is Russia actually who is to be blamed for all these problems.
We need to solve them somehow. We can only make an appeal to stop
attacks attacking us in the media. We really try to do a lot to support our
Ukrainian neighbors. And we have sacrificed a lot.
We have given a lot in order to help Ukraine.
And we want to assist Ukraine because we understand what it means to be placed
under Russian aggression. But we also need to protect our
citizens. And this is our fundamental one.
When you're talking about protecting your citizens, you have an election next
month in Poland. And right now the far right call it
confederation is gaining in the polls. Is there a concern that in your society
there is fatigue about aiding Ukraine and fatigue about the support that
Poland is giving to give the borders of Polish?
The election is coming in Poland.
It is parliamentary election, however. But in my second term as president of
Poland, I do not run in these elections. I just observe them.
I also follow the campaign, which is ongoing.
However, it is a fact that the war in Ukraine, the one started by Russia, its
full scale attack more than a year and a half ago, has been going on for a very
long time. As I said, a few million Ukrainian
citizens lived in our country. About 2 million still live there.
They are among us. And there are many different problems
and also people to people problems. And because of that, of course, there is
a phenomenon of a certain fatigue. It is just normal.
It is just human. Polish people have sacrificed a lot to
help their neighbors from Ukraine. Having said that, the situations among
people are different. There are various killings and of
course, it is also the circumstance of the case that there are some political
groups who play out those emotions in a very straightforward way.
Please remember we are a direct neighbour to Russia and it is in the
interests of Russia to influence the elections in Poland.
It is in their interest to decrease the support for Ukraine and decrease the
support that the Poles give to Ukraine so that Poland is not send Ukraine.
This is in that Russian interest today. So everybody attacks Poland today.
Everyone who instead of sitting at the table and talking to
Polish authorities, they really support Russia.
That debate is also playing out whether or not to send more aid to Ukraine in
the United States right now, in Washington, in Congress, if there's no
breakthrough from Ukraine on the counter offensive, do you think the global
support will wane? Will you go to Virginia?
From my point of view, one thing is at hand Amanda Lang partners.
International law has to be respected. In other words, the primacy of
international law has to be restored. And one of the fundamental principles of
international law is respect for internationally recognized waters.
We need to bring about a situation where Russia withdraws from the occupied
Ukrainian territories. In a nutshell,
it is important that Ukraine regains control of its international borders.
Let me put it this way This will mean the victory of Ukraine and the victory
of the free world. Precisely this.
It is not about defeating Russia. Thanksgiving is not about, let's say,
foreign troops entering the territory of Russia.
No, absolutely not. We do not want it whatsoever.
What we want is to make sure that Ukrainian troops
are effective in dealing with the Russian aggressors so that Ukraine can
regain the territories that Russia robbed from it.
When that happens, we will be able to say that the primacy of international
law has been restored. And this is, of course, a chance from
the perspective of keeping peace. There's also a US presidential election
here in the United States next year. You had a nice rapport with former
President Donald Trump. He's leading in the Republican primary
polls. If he was to come to power, do you think
the US would continue to support Ukraine?
Because he's been very critical of that aid going to Kiev, said of Shishkin.
First and foremost, keeps changing it. I'm deeply convinced it is not only my
conviction, but the conviction of many Polish politicians that our alliance
with the United States is of absolutely importance for our security and for the
security of Europe. Not only the United States is our most
important ally. From our perspective, it is not really
so important who is the president of the United States?
It is the decision of the American people, the obligation of Polish
authorities. It is my personal opinion is to build
the best possible relationship with the United States, to make progress.
This is of key importance from the perspective of our security and among
others. That was the reason why we changed the
agents of the president in the past. Of course, I didn't know who would be
the president. Now we do not know who the president in
2025, but one of the priorities of our presidency, because in 2025, Poland will
hold the presidency in the European Union for six months.
From January until June, we will preside over the European Union.
In a nutshell, that Poland will preside over European Union councils.
So the thing is that the priority, which is enshrined among one of the main
directions of our activity in the presidency, one that priority is a
strengthening of transatlantic relations, boosting the alliance between
the European Union and the United States.
We believe that in order to safeguard the security of Europe in the world,
also to safeguard economic development of the European Union, it is of key
importance to cooperate with the United States.
We are convinced about that, and this is what we want to support.
This is what we are doing. More United States in Europe, More
Europe in the United States, more cooperation in the continent and between
the continents. The transatlantic cooperation, this is
according to us, that key task which we should be implementing for the security
of Europe and the world. And this is what we are trying to do.
Just finally, I spoke to Annalena Baerbock this weekend, and she's also
here for the U.N. General Assembly.
And she said that Europe was in a total shock when Trump first came to power
after the 2016 election. Olaf Schulz, the chancellor of Germany,
has already said he wants Biden to win and he's hopeful Biden would win.
Will you weigh in on this presidential election for Trump or Biden at some
point? Right from the beginning, I repeat,
I was asked this question for the first time back in 2016 when the presidential
election was coming in the United States, and I had one of my first
presidential visits, which I paid here, and I said, the American people will
decide. The American people will elect the
person who, according to them, will be a better president for them and for the
United States. I did not vote in the US.
I vote for president in Poland, and I can speak in Poland about who should be
president, according to my opinion. My opinion as an ordinary citizen and
ordinary voter in the United States. It is up to the American people to
decide who will be the best president for them.
My duty as Polish president is to make sure that the relationship with the
United States is as good as it gets. In other words, that myself, as Polish
president have gotten the best possible relations with a U.S.
president, the incumbent, and a future president.
So that from the perspective of Polish-American relations, the Polish
affairs are conducted in the best possible way, the most effective way.
Andre Duda, thank you so much for your time.
Polish President Covenant. Thank you.|||Russia you know we see what you guys are doing 
right I am doing nothing but my special military   operation and there is nothing you can do to 
stop it you're shelling bombing using Rockets   missiles you name it on Odessa mercilessly for 
some [ __ ] reason that's interesting where is   your air defense obviously not in Odessa you 
picked somewhere where our air defense wasn't   so that way you could claim it as a win when in 
reality You're just showing that you can't get   through our air defense so you pick somewhere else 
and aside from that you also have Wagner or should   I call them wanker troops staging along the Polish 
border we are just doing military exercise and so   are we what to talk about you do training along 
my border I do training along my border it's good   time you pull this should be more respectful of 
the land that Joseph Stalin gave you since you're   such a big fan of history have you seen the map 
of the Polish Lithuanian Commonwealth here I have   the map around here somewhere please show it to 
the Vodka flavored deep [ __ ] could you look at   that Belarus and part of Russia is supposed to be 
mine if you cross into Belarus or Russia it will   be seen as an act of War it's a two-way street you 
cross into my territory is the same just remember   Wagner is a private military group and not part 
of the Russian Federation therefore not Russian at   least I know I would discourage them from Crossing 
into polit because there will be no survivors   I will make the battle of conical 
Fields look like a [ __ ] Tea Party are you crying I am just so unbelievably proud   of him the rest of NATO you need to 
listen that's how you make a threat|||foreign [Music] [Music] welcome to the Republic of Poland Poland is a central European country its territory expands the central European Plain from Baltic Sea in the north to sedati and the Magnificent Carpathian Mountains in the south the country is bordered with Lithuania and Russia to the Northeast Belarus and Ukraine to the east Czech Republic and Slovakia to the South and Germany to the West and also it shares Maritime borders with Sweden and Denmark from The Towering tatra mountains to the rugged Coastline Poland is packed with Splendid history fewer known gems stunning views wonderful stories impressive architecture and mouth-watering Cuisine that are undoubtedly Delight visitors from all over the world Poland is undoubtedly a place to have a great time so come join us this is Scenic Hunter's Unforgettable Journey to Find 12 best places to visit in Poland [Music] number 12 malborg malborg is a Charming medieval town in northern Poland known for its impressive Gothic Castle which is one of the largest brick structures in Europe the malborg parcel is a UNESCO world heritage site and a popular attraction for visitors to the region the Castle's Grand Halls stunning Courtyards an impressive architecture offer a glimpse into the medieval history of Poland visitors can explore the Castle's many rooms and Exhibits which feature a range of artifacts and historical Treasures the town itself also offers a range of attractions including the beautiful Saint Mary's Church which dates back to the 14th century and the Charming Old Town which is filled with quaint cafes shops and restaurants in the summer months visitors can enjoy outdoor activities like kayaking cycling and Hiking along the nearby rivers and forests whether you're interested in history architecture or outdoor adventure malborg is a must visit destination for anyone traveling to Poland foreign [Music] [Music] Forest below Forest is a UNESCO world heritage site and one of the last remaining primeval forests in Europe home to Europe's largest population of Bison the forest is a paradise for nature lovers and Wildlife enthusiasts visitors can explore the forest's vast network of trails which wind through dense Woodland Marshland and Meadows and taking the breathtaking scenery of the forest the forest also boasts a range of attractions including the below National Park which features a wide variety of Wildlife and bird species and the Bilo Isa Palace the beautiful hunting lodge that dates back to the 16th century visitors can also take part in guided tours of the forest go cycling or horseback riding and explore the nearby Villages and towns which offer a glimpse into the Region's Rich cultural heritage whether you're looking to experience the beauty of nature or immerse yourself in Polish history and culture the eloieza forest is a must visit destination for anyone traveling to Poland please [Music] [Music] places number 10 Warsaw Warsaw the capital of Poland is a city with a rich history and vibrant culture visitors can explore the city's many museums Galleries and cultural landmarks including the royal castle the Warsaw Uprising Museum and the national museum the old town which is a UNESCO world heritage site is a must-see destination with its Charming cobblestone streets historic buildings and picturesque Market Square Warsaw is also known for its world-class dining scene with a range of international and traditional Polish restaurants to choose from visitors can also enjoy a night out at one of the city's many bars and clubs or attend a concert or theatrical performance at one of its renowned venues for those who enjoy the outdoors the city's many parks including wazienki Park and the willan of Palace Gardens provide a tranquil respite from the bustling City Center finally Warsaw is an excellent base for exploring the surrounding areas including the Charming town of shellaz overwilla birthplace of Frederick Chopin and the Beautiful campinos National Park with its Rich history vibrant culture and beautiful surroundings Warsaw is a must visit destination for anyone traveling to Poland [Music] foreign [Music] located on the Baltic coast of Poland is a Charming Seaside Town known for its long sandy beaches stunning architecture and Lively atmosphere visitors can stroll along the famous wooden Pier which is the longest pier in Europe and take in the stunning views of the Baltic Sea support is also home to a range of cultural attractions including the Museum of sopot the Crooked house and the Opera leschner an open-air Amphitheater that hosts concerts and festivals throughout the year in addition to its cultural offerings support is known for its vibrant nightlife with a variety of bars clubs and restaurants that cater to all tastes visitors can also indulge in some retail therapy at the city's many Boutique shops and art galleries for those looking to relax and unwind sopot offers numerous Spa and Wellness facilities as well as access to a range of outdoor activities such as cycling horse riding and water sports with its beautiful beaches stunning architecture and vibrant cultural scene socot is a must visit destination for anyone traveling to Poland [Music] thank you foreign [Music] Lake District The Missourian Lake District in northeastern Poland is a natural Wonderland of over 2 000 Crystal Clear Lakes picturesque forests and Rolling Hills it is an ideal destination for anyone looking to get away from the hustle and bustle of the city and connect with nature visitors can explore the Region's Charming Villages which are steeped in history and culture and enjoy outdoor activities such as kayaking fishing cycling and hiking the district is also home to several nature reserves including the biebza National Park which is known for its diverse wildlife and beautiful landscapes another must visit attraction is the wolf's Lair a complex of bunkers and shelters that served as Adolf Hitler's Eastern Front military headquarters during World War II The Missourian Lake District is also famous for its delicious Regional Cuisine including freshwater fish dishes and traditional therage visitors can enjoy these local Delicacies at the numerous restaurants and cafes located throughout the region whether you're looking for relaxation Adventure or a combination of both The Missourian Lake District is the perfect destination for your next vacation thank you foreign [Music] Village zelipia a small village located in Southeastern Poland is known for its tradition of painting colorful floral patterns on the walls ceilings and even Furniture of its houses the tradition began over a century ago when local women started painting over the soot that collected on their homes Interiors from wood burning stoves today the village is a colorful and Charming destination that attracts visitors from around the world visitors can take a stroll through the villages winding streets to admire the beautifully painted houses and Gardens and even take part in a painting Workshop to learn the art of traditional polish floral painting the village is also home to several museums including the zelipia museum which showcases the history and evolution of the painted houses visitors can enjoy traditional polish cuisine at The Village's local restaurants and cafes or take a walk through the nearby forests and nature Reserves with its unique and colorful charm zelipia is a must visit destination for anyone interested in Polish folk art and culture foreign [Music] foreign [Music] a UNESCO world heritage site located in Northern Poland is a Charming city known for its Gothic architecture and Rich history visitors can explore the city's old town with its stunning medieval buildings and winding cobblestone streets the city's most famous Sun astronomer Nicolas Copernicus is celebrated with a museum in his honor and a statue in the Old Town Square the city is also known for its delicious gingerbread which has been made here for over 700 years and visitors can learn more about the tradition at the Living Museum of gingerbread torun is home to numerous museums and galleries including the Museum of torun gingerbread and the Museum of ethnography and crafts which showcases the Region's traditional handicrafts visitors can take a stroll along the banks of the Vistula River or explore the nearby ruins of the Teutonic Knights Castle toran's vibrant cultural scene includes a range of festivals and events throughout the year such as the torun jazz festival and the fair with its Rich history beautiful architecture and delicious food torun is a city that should not be missed [Music] thank you [Music] number five poznan poznan located in Western Poland is a vibrant city with a rich history and culture the city's Old Town Square is a beautiful example of Renaissance architecture featuring colorful houses ornate facades and the iconic town hall with its famous Tower visitors can explore the numerous museums and galleries in the city including the national museum which houses a vast collection of polish art and artifacts cosnan is also known for its Lively food and drink scene with numerous restaurants and bars serving up traditional dishes such as potato dumplings roasted pork and polish beer the city is home to several parks and green spaces including the scenic Malta Lake perfect for a relaxing stroll or a boat ride visitors can also take a walk through the beautiful Citadel park or visit the poznan cathedral a stunning Gothic structure that dates back to the 10th century Cotton's cultural calendar is packed with events and festivals throughout the year including the malta festival and the poznan International Fair with its Rich history beautiful architecture and Lively cultural scene posnan is a destination that should not be missed [Music] number four guys located on the Baltic Coast in Northern Poland is a city steeped in history and culture the city's old town is a beautifully preserved example of medieval architecture featuring colorful houses Gothic churches and Charming cobblestone streets visitors can explore the historic long Market home to the iconic Neptune Fountain and the artist Court a Renaissance era meeting place for merchants and Nobles the city also boasts numerous museums and galleries including the Museum of the second world war and the national museum which showcases the best of Polish art and culture Foodies will appreciate the city's vibrant culinary scene which features a range of local Specialties such as smoked fish theragey and Beagle stew dice is also known for its beautiful beaches and seaside promenades perfect for a leisurely stroll or a day at the beach visitors can take a boat tour along the motlawa river or visit the westerplate peninsula where the first shots of World War II were fired with its Rich history stunning architecture and beautiful beaches darisk is a destination that will leave you captivated and longing to return [Music] [Music] number three tatra mountains the tatra mountains located in southern Poland are a stunning natural wonder that offer breathtaking views and a range of outdoor activities visitors can hike along the numerous trails that wind through the mountains taking in the picturesque scenery of Rocky Peaks cascading waterfalls and Lush forests the tatra national park which covers much of the range is home to a diverse range of wildlife including brown bears lynx and Eagles in the winter the tatra mountains become a Haven for winter sports enthusiasts with skiing snowboarding and ice skating among the many activities on offer the Charming town of zacapana known as the winter capital of Poland is a popular base for exploring the mountains with its traditional wooden houses vibrant local culture and delicious Regional cuisine visitors can also take a ride on the funicular Railway to the top of Mount gubafka for panoramic views of the tatra mountains and the surrounding Countryside with its stunning natural beauty wide range of activities and Charming local culture the tatra mountains are a destination that should not be missed [Music] number two broughtswaff the fourth largest city in Poland is a Hidden Gem waiting to be discovered known as the Venice of Poland for its numerous Bridges and waterways the city boasts a Charming old town with a vibrant cultural scene visitors can explore the stunning Market Square lined with colorful townhouses and the iconic town hall and visit the gothic style rotsworth Cathedral one of the largest in Poland the city is also home to numerous museums and galleries including the National Museum and the Panorama of the battle of razawitza which showcases a massive panoramic painting depicting a famous battle from polish history Foodies will appreciate the city's culinary scene which features a variety of delicious local Specialties a stroll through the picturesque austro thimsky the oldest part of the city is a must for those seeking a glimpse into rotswaff's Rich history visitors can also take a boat tour along the Oda River or visit the nearby Centennial Hall a UNESCO world heritage site and a stunning example of modernist architecture with its unique blend of History culture and beauty rocklaw is a city that should not be missed [Music] [Music] foreign [Music] a city in southern Poland is a Charming blend of medieval and modern with something to offer every type of Traveler the historic old town is a UNESCO world heritage site featuring The stunning main Market Square and Gothic Saint Mary's Basilica visitors can also explore the vavel royal castle and the fascinating underground tunnels of the rhineck underground Museum for those interested in history a visit to the former Jewish ghetto and the Schindler Factory museum is a must Krakow also boasts a vibrant nightlife scene with numerous bars and clubs to enjoy Foodies will appreciate the city's delicious Cuisine which includes traditional dishes like pierogi and kielbasa Krakow also hosts a number of annual festivals including the famous Krakow Christmas Market and the Jewish culture Festival which attracts visitors from around the world to escape the city take a day trip to the nearby wielichka salt mine or Auschwitz birkenau concentration camp with its Rich history stunning architecture and vibrant culture Krakow is a destination not to be missed foreign [Music] we do hope you enjoyed our journey to the mesmerizing country of Poland find us on Facebook Instagram and Pinterest visit www.scenichunter.com for more details don't forget to subscribe to the scenic Hunter for another exciting adventurous Journey until then it's goodbye from us [Music]|||Welcome to Hungary, a member of 
the European Union for two decades,   who is often referred to as the black 
sheep of the European Union family. But why do people think this? Well, under Prime Minister 
Viktor Orbán's leadership,   Hungary has faced criticism for its handling 
of judiciary independence, media landscape,   and allegations of discrimination. These 
concerns have led to such significant   democratic backsliding that a study by the 
NGO Freedom House concluded that since 2010   Hungary has witnessed such a democratic decline, 
that it can no longer be called a democracy. The European Union has taken action by freezing 
over 30 billion euros in EU funds designated for   Hungary and presenting a list of essential 
reforms that must be implemented before the   funds are released. Naturally, this has 
provoked a strong reaction from Orbán,   who has set out to obstruct EU 
initiatives whenever possible. For instance, one of the European Commission's key 
proposals revolves around allocating 50 billion   euros to Ukraine and commencing EU membership 
negotiations with Ukraine in December. However,   this hinges on unanimous agreement among all 27 
member states, requiring the approval of each.   Hungary, on the other hand, has already signalled 
its intent to potentially veto this decision,   a move some perceive as a form of leverage,in 
other words blackmail, to unfreeze EU funds. This standoff has already happened 
before. In December last year,   Hungary used its veto power to 
block aid and arms to Ukraine,   as well as a minimum corporation tax rate of 15% 
for companies across the EU. However, once the   EU unfroze a portion of the funds designated 
for Hungary, the country withdrew its veto. This game of cat and mouse is 
counterproductive and cripples   the EU’s ability to respond to 
international crises quickly. So, what can the EU do in response? Well, the EU has a potential solution 
in its toolkit, called Article 7,   often referred to as the "nuclear option." 
This measure involves suspending a member   state's voting rights within the EU, effectively 
limiting its ability to influence EU decisions.   This would mean that Hungary could no 
longer obstruct key EU legislation. So how does this work? The process begins with the European 
Council, where the heads of state from EU   member countries must collectively assess and 
reach a consensus regarding whether a member   state is persistently breaching EU values, 
such as democracy and the rule of law. Once   unanimous agreement among the European Council 
members is achieved, Article 7 can be initiated. Subsequently, the matter proceeds 
to the European Parliament,   where a confirmation of the breach 
requires a four-fifths majority vote.   Once the European Parliament confirms 
the breach, Article 7 can be invoked,   resulting in the suspension of the member 
state's voting rights within EU institutions.   This process underscores the EU's commitment to 
upholding its fundamental values and principles. The European Parliament even voted in overwhelming 
favour to start this process in 2018 and in 2022. So why has this not already happened with Hungary? 
Well, Hungary has a key partner in crime: Poland. Under the governance of Poland's ruling Law 
and Justice Party (PiS), there has been a   consistent alignment with Hungary in defending 
one another on the EU level. Both countries,   often sharing similar views on issues related 
to national sovereignty and EU values,   have worked together to resist 
potential sanctions and measures   stemming from concerns about democratic 
backsliding within the EU. In practice,   this means that any attempt to trigger article 7 
for Hungary will just be blocked by Poland's Veto. But things have changed. The elections held in Poland on October 15th 
marked a significant setback for the Law and   Justice Party (PiS), which secured only 194 
seats. And their potential coalition partner   scored a mere 18 seats. In response, the main 
opposition, Civic Coalition, led by former Prime   Minister and ex European Council President Donald 
Tusk, along with the Third Way and the Left,   have joined forces to form a coalition government 
to remove PiS from office. Collectively,   they hold 248 seats, granting them the majority 
required to rule and shape Poland's future This marks a remarkable victory 
for politician Donald Tusk,   as his leadership  and strong EU profile is great news for 
the EU, as his government is poised to   uphold EU principles concerning 
democracy and the rule of law. What about Hungary? It goes without saying 
that this is bad news for Orban. Without Poland's   support, Hungary runs the risk of losing 
their voting rights within the European Union. Or do they? Enter Slovakia. Following the recent Slovakian elections on 
September 30th, Fico, the leader of SMER,   a social democratic and left-wing populist party, 
secured victory. His election campaign included   pledges to halt military aid to Ukraine and 
criticism of sanctions on Russia. Fico's leadership may steer Slovakia closer to Hungary, 
distancing itself from the unified stance on   supporting Ukraine that the EU and Western 
nations have aimed to uphold. Furthermore,   Slovakia might fill the void that Poland has 
left behind and become Hungary's new partner   in crime when it comes to defending 
one another when facing Article 7. Here is what we think. The fundamental 
question is whether the EU should even   attempt to trigger Article 7 against Hungary in 
the first place. It's a complex dilemma. Orban   could exploit his inability to vote in the EU as 
ammunition to further criticise the organisation,   especially given his control over the media in 
Hungary. This could potentially shift Hungary   from being one of the most pro-EU countries 
to a Eurosceptic one. On the flip side,   waiting until the Hungarian elections in 
2026 carries the risk of significant damage,   as the EU might encounter obstructions at every 
turn. Not to mention, Orban might win again. From our viewpoint, it's becoming increasingly 
evident that a multi-tiered Europe might offer   the most viable solution. In this scenario, some 
countries would engage in deeper integration while   others take a more restrained approach. 
This would imply that Hungary remains an   important EU member but must undergo reforms 
before ascending to a more integrated EU tier. For a more comprehensive explanation, subscribe 
to watch our upcoming video on this concept,   or refer to an earlier video on the screen for 
a preliminary understanding of this approach.   But please bear in mind that it is one of our older 
videos :). With older animation. But please also let us know in the   comments what you think the EU should do. 
Thanks for watching and until next time. And if you would like to support the channel further, please consider, signing up to Patreon|||story you don't need anything from this okay so first impression of the airport it looks fine I don't know looks nice okay from what I saw from the gate to the bathroom to the outside so what do you see around us Warsaw what do you think about it where are the mountains they're not here I noticed this very flat I mean from up high it looks green so that's nice [Music] foreign [Music] looks like a circumcised cleaner okay the ketchup tasted right here it does it's less sweet right yeah it's more like Tangy what do you want to say that I don't like how real that everything tastes here I need my preservatives and my food so I like the hot dog at first just with the ketchup but then I reached the garlic sauce it's too much I can't do it and this yerba mate tastes like there's dirt in it and apparently that's normal but what do you do [Music] [Music] so we stopped at a random place for some breakfast and I gotta say it looks delicious and fresh definitely look at this it's a toast with asparagus two eggs looks delicious and this is mine a salad egg some cottage cheese some Italian ham and some freshly baked bread what do you think that was up or down that's all right all right lower it needs more salt and hot sauce [Music] thank you [Music] thank you [Music] [Music] thank you what do you think about this uh beautiful Clear Water it looks like the Truckee river floods when it floods yeah when it melts yeah it's very murky it is is it ever clean no no that's that's clean no you want to go for a dip no never ever um I have to take turns breathing and drink Don't Drown yourself so bad yeah you sound terrible very congested yeah yeah what do you think about this spot it's cute I was up or down where is it thumbs up okay good first impression yeah yeah okay [Music] okay [Music] [Music] foreign [Music] first experience [Laughter] this is the water park we were talking about yeah yeah that's where Polish people come and swim yes you likey yeah thank you [Music] allergies [Music] you know what I hope your allergies get better here I think they will they're gonna go no they're gonna go away here yeah how how do you score the Japanese garden yeah thumbs up only one okay two great hey so you've never seen lily pads in real life no how's that possible yeah I don't think there's any like California organ nothing on the west coast no can't find it interesting foreign how do you how do you rate your allergies where 10 is like marvelous it's like super good 11. outstanding hey Ivana this is the biggest waterfall in Poland is it it is it's the hot tallest it moves the most amount of water Supernatural yeah it it's been here for millions and millions of years beautiful right what are we doing so you're leaving me here yeah yeah that's why I brought you here yeah bye where oh yeah no it's just tired it's just sleepy upside down [Music] oh [Music] foreign [Music] [Music] [Music] what do you think salt yeah immediately can you see it no are you disappointed there was like three whole butterflies in the Butterfly House I know and every animal is like outside or inside and you go outside and oh it's inside you go inside oh it's outside so I'm wondering if there's any animals here it is yeah that's a zoo yeah you like the accessibility of it all the tall stairs and gravel roads you can only get so far to so many if you have a wheelchair you've got you're gone you stay at the entrance yeah I'll wait for you guys here this way foreign are you enjoying the crowds not bad okay it's okay what do you think about the main Square it's interesting yeah okay cute clean yep there you go yeah [Music] what about the chance nonstop [Music] [Music] so you had a chance to try different dishes in Poland what do you think a lot of them need more seasoning more salt or something black pepper give me some yeah what do you think about the breakfast we ate the first day it was good it looked good it was like healthy but it was not a lot of flavor okay what about the fancy polish Kitchen restaurant the duck was really good okay tasty what about the Czech food that was good too kebab best one so far okay what about the hot dog from the gas station it was good until I got to the garlic sauce it get disappointing what else did we oh the ramen oh Robin yeah it was okay right kind of overrated in my opinion supposedly the best one but no no sorry SK noodles in Reno oh that was probably loaded with sodium yeah that's why it's so good so in general thumbs up or down just one yeah okay it needs more flavor just for encouragement it's good [Music] what's your first impression people probably want to know how do you feel what do you think about everything you saw so far it's a fun time I mean your friends are nice yeah no one was really like mean or anything they just do their own thing yeah what about prices [Music] um it is for a tourist is Poland so far what you expect it or did you expect something else less more [Music] I don't know I didn't know what to expect I think I didn't think it was going to be as flat as it is okay like as far as like having like mountains or Hills or something you know um and then the buildings in that area that we were in I don't know expected I guess okay yeah you're kind of expecting like old buildings and yeah what do you think about the people like on the streets in general to the general public or yeah homeless people in general public there is it as many homeless people as there is in the states yeah I think I don't know I mean I'm over there you just see them pretty much everywhere in here you did see them but it's like very scarce like they're like here and there they're not like a whole like Community like apparently they don't have their own little housing you know yeah um [Music] and then the general people everyone seems so serious just nobody's smiling nobody smiles uh a lot of smoking everywhere which is crazy yeah that was also bothering me you know like after a few days constantly smelling cigarettes everywhere so you like it so far yeah okay it's nice so what's better as far as what here are the states traveling yeah we're here or in the states I don't know I don't feel like you can compare okay I feel like well okay so so far I feel like there's more to see in the states like there's more scenery I guess right that's what I'm trying to say yes because here is just like land random patches of forest yeah Countryside and forests and packed cities impact cities [Music] um foreign [Music] foreign [Music] foreign foreign foreign [Music] [Music] they need salt right now foreign foreign just go for a minute with a lantern no lights some salt to add it to my freaking dishes that I buy around here hello baby yes so this is the most Polish thing you can eat you know what's the name of it all those are the Russian dumplings it's the same thing yeah but the Russian hopefully I don't burn myself how is it it's good but I need some Valentino Valentina you like it is so what do you think about the main Square very holy wait what holy yeah yeah we got lucky the spirit of the Jesus Holy Spirit activate Holy Spirit activate yeah you like it yeah there's a lot of people but it's probably because of the holiday yeah a long weekend yeah that's why let's go praise the Lord let's go that's raising the room [Music] foreign [Music] [Applause] oh I'm a queen I dare you to what run through them no do you see how much fun that little girl is having yeah ruin it for her it's traumatizing in any therapy yeah let's do it she's feeding them I'm not gonna do that oh my God you're no fun I dare you go inside with those kids over there with all those children yeah they have germs um foreign [Music] do you feel like a princess now no oh okay you didn't bring me here on a carriage with horses oh I thought I'm gonna do it after this but since no you're not someone get me on a horse and carriage subscribe what do you think it looks cool yeah what was your question is this where they brought the Lions out with the people and they fought to the death or something yes yes that's exactly this place yeah where's the drain for the blood behind you um foreign [Music] thank you foreign [Music]|||Europe is in disarray as the prospect of 
full-scale war on the continent becomes   more and more likely. While 
other nations are panicking,   one has taken the opportunity to arm up and 
ensure its sovereignty cannot be challenged   by the looming Russian bear in the east. Let’s 
look at this surprising dark horse in the current   European arms race and how its history is 
shaping its ongoing rapid militarization. On the first day of World War II, the German 
army surged across the borders of Poland with   a blitzkrieg of infantry and armored 
cars. From the north, south, and west,   the invaders came, aided by Slovak forces 
and its temporary ally, the Soviet Union.   The Polish government was not prepared for the 
onslaught that was about to ravage their nation. There was no chance to negotiate with 
Germans, who had made up their mind,   so Poland quickly rallied its available defenses. 
In one skirmish, German infantry were caught   off guard by a cavalry charge led by Colonel 
Kazimierz Mastalerz. Even with the advantage   of modern firearms, the Germans couldn’t fend 
off an entire Polish squadron on horseback. The invading infantry was forced to disperse, 
but before the cavalry could celebrate this   minor victory, machine gun fire ripped 
through the air towards the riders and   their horses. Alongside German reconnaissance 
vehicles, modern German tactics and technology   decimated the Polish troops. Colonel Mastalerz 
was killed in the ensuing fire, as well as one   of his subordinate officers, and the rest of 
the cavalry was forced to gallop to cover. This historic battle between Polish cavalrymen 
and German heavy artillery came to be known as   the Charge at Krojanty, and it has lived 
on as an exaggerated myth in a number of   propaganda campaigns. Due to a critical lapse in 
communication, the events of the day were falsely   reported by Italian journalists as having included 
a direct cavalry charge from the Polish against   German tanks. While this interpretation was 
based on gruesome photographs of the aftermath,   the image of riders with lances and 
swords facing down invaders with far   greater military capabilities was embedded in 
the collective consciousness of the modern world. Nazi Germany used this mythological visualization 
of the Charge of Krojanty to boast about how   advanced their weaponry was as well as to 
imply that they had more tanks to utilize   against their enemies than they truly did. 
Soviet Propaganda took this a step further,   implying that Poland had sent many members of 
their cavalry to die out of complete ignorance. In   the constructed Soviet view of the events, Polish 
military leadership was reckless and unwilling to   modernize their army. This piece of propaganda was 
taught in many schools up until the 1990s, leading   to many people growing up thinking the Polish army 
was fundamentally weak and unwilling to modernize. Of course this is just a piece of propaganda, even 
in the year 1939, Poland was already developing   its own motorized battalions and was implementing 
anti-tank artillery within its armed forces.   Though still considerably less powerful than the 
great powers at the time, Poland was nowhere near   as ignorant of the advances in warfare as either 
Nazi or Soviet narratives implied. Even so,   history is written by the victors, and 
the myth of the Charge of Krojanty stuck,   especially as Poland struggled to keep up with 
the rest of its allies during World War II.  But times are changing, and Poland has taken 
it upon itself to disprove this lasting myth.   The once downtrodden republic has come a 
long way from its prior crushing defeats,   which ironically might have been the key 
factor in galvanizing Poland towards efficient   self-defense. Poland is quickly becoming 
Europe’s underdog military powerhouse,   but before you find out how, 
you need to find out why. The Charge at Krojanty was only the beginning of 
Poland’s struggles during the Second World War,   as the fighting both within and beyond the 
borders brought many Poles to the front lines.   Domestically, the German occupation was opposed 
by an expansive resistance network that provided   43% of all reports to British intelligence coming 
from central Europe. Abroad, Polish troops were   the fourth largest demographic among soldiers 
across the European fronts. Even as an underground   state, Poland was already making itself an 
instrumental part of the Allied war effort. Though liberating Europe from the Nazis was the 
goal, Poland had a responsibility to itself as   well. It resented the possibility that its 
territory could remain occupied after the   war by an opportunistic foreign power. These fears 
were confirmed when their own government-in-exile   was given no sway over the proceedings at the 
Yalta Conference. The communist dictator Joseph   Stalin made a power grab that forced Poland to 
capitulate to the whims of the Soviet state. Under the guise of allowing Poland to retain 
national sovereignty, elections were rigged,   and the mechanisms of governance 
were used deceptively to promote   a pro-Soviet and pro-Communist policy plan. With the rest of Poland’s European allies 
having effectively turned their back on   the occupied nation, the Polish people were 
stuck contending with Stalinist oppression.   This sudden betrayal would linger in 
the minds future generations to come. Once again, Poland’s sense of national 
identity was resilient in the face of   outside authoritarianism. Many of the 
same resistance organizations that were   active during German occupation had 
grown into political movements that   stood in opposition to communist 
rule. These included the Freedom   and Independence Association as well as 
the Polish home army or “Armia Krajowa.” The most powerful force in overcoming communism 
was the trade unions - which brought about social   justice and workers' rights on a level that 
Stalinist communism was incapable of offering.   This united movement of solidarity allowed Poland 
to take power back into the hands of its people,   and with support from the United States as 
well as the Catholic Church, succeeded in   a non-violent revolution that stamped out all 
remaining elements of communism by the 1990s. Having overcome two different authoritarian 
regimes that sought to exploit the common people   with lofty promises, Poland under Solidarity 
was for a brief moment in time positioned   uniquely as a country that could realistically 
achieve the supposed aims of both fascism and   communism without the corruption and deception 
common in real life examples of both ideologies. This unique situation would not last, however, 
as the onset of liberal capitalism throughout   the 1990s cooled Poland into becoming less of 
a radical powder keg. But even while Poland   comfortably faded into the background of global 
politics, there was one value that remained as   an overriding principle for its future endeavors. 
That value is the importance of self-sufficiency. This is how we’ve arrived at a current 
moment where Poland has shored up its   defenses to the point of eclipsing several 
of its neighbors in raw firepower. Being   situated in the center of a region that 
has, for decades, been threatened by war,   Poland stands to gain a lot by making itself the 
dominant military force in Eastern Central Europe. In terms of raw personnel, Poland currently has a 
slightly smaller army than its former adversary,   Germany. But Minister of Defense Mariusz 
Błaszczak has announced plans to swell   those numbers to a total of 300,000 by 2035 
- which would officially put Poland head   and shoulders above any mainland European 
nation army with the exception of Russia. Poland’s growing dominance in the region will 
likely grow as Germany continues to be reluctant   to fully remilitarize in accordance with its 
own Morgenthau Plan following World War II.   Poland’s geographical proximity to the Baltic 
States will also make them the most reliable   defender of the vulnerable NATO members. This 
would put it on almost even footing with France   as NATO’s primary or secondary European power, 
eclipsing the once prominent United Kingdom. So what exactly are Poland’s plans,   and will they really turn a historical 
underdog into a rising Great Power? Even without the sheer numbers 
promised by the new recruitment plan,   Poland’s land forces are already formidable. 
Poland possesses a much greater number of tanks   and howitzers than most of its neighbors and 
is on track to have more than Germany, Italy,   and France combined. These heavy metal weapons 
are primarily of American and South Korean make,   and have the top-notch specs to match. Military 
trade deals such as these free Poland up from   relying on outdated Russian weaponry, which, 
as can be seen in Russia’s catastrophic loss   of tanks in Ukraine, have been shown to 
have some rather severe design flaws. As part of this effort to modernize, Poland 
has steadily been replacing Russian-made tanks   with the state-of-the-art M1 Abrams - an American 
tank that boasts both extreme mobility and highly   durable armor. The stunning reputation of the 
Abrams as a battle tank cannot be understated,   and the United States has used this tank to 
great effect in its own foreign skirmishes. The use of depleted uranium in the armor 
makes the M1 Abrams highly resistant to   both ballistics and explosives, and 
very few that have been deployed have   ever been critically damaged. Among 
those Abrams tanks that were downed,   several were taken out by friendly fire from 
the anti-tank weaponry of other Abrams units. With a 1500 horsepower turbine that can maneuver 
the tank across all manner of difficult terrain,   the Abrams is able to run down opposing 
tanks and destroy them at close range.   And with two high-caliber machine 
guns in addition to the main cannon,   the tank has more than enough 
firepower to do just that. Compared to a Russian T-72, which is 
a considerably lighter tank that has a   maximum speed of 37 miles per hour, the M1 Abrams   can travel 45 miles per hour while still 
carrying the weight of its heavy armor. The most revolutionary feature of the M1 Abrams 
by far is its onboard communication systems,   which include blue force tracking and infrared 
sights to enhance visibility and cooperation   with friendly units on the battlefield. These 
tools help with heightened battlefield awareness,   making the Abrams a combat vehicle 
that reaps great rewards when it’s   piloted by a significantly competent 
and well-trained four-person team. Apart from the Abrams, Poland has acquired a large 
supply of K2 Black Panther tanks from South Korea   and has announced plans to open a factory that 
will construct them domestically. Dubbed the   “most expensive tank in the world”, the K2 was 
developed as a modification of the standard M1   Abrams into a sleeker and smaller battle tank with 
even greater mobility options. Its ability to ford   across medium-depth bodies of water through 
hydropneumatic suspension is unmatched by any   armored vehicle in history. Additionally, the K2 
Black Panther boasts unique weapon systems that   surpass the Abrams in tank-to-tank combat - most 
notably the Korean Smart Top-Attack Munition or   KSTAM fired from the cannon. The KSTAM is guided 
through smart munitions technology to seek out   the weakest parts of enemy tanks, and is a recent 
innovation of South Korean military technology. While the overall similarities in 
appearance between the K2 Panther   and M1 Abrams have given it a second nickname 
(the “baby abrams” due to its smaller size),   taking the South Korean tank 
lightly would be a grave mistake. The hefty price tag on the 1000 K2 Black Panthers 
Poland has purchased is especially daunting,   but given that it’s the most powerful 
pound-for-pound tank on the market,   the price tag is justified. Poland will be the 
first nation in both the European Union and   NATO to utilize these marvels of South Korean 
engineering outside of their native country,   and by producing them domestically 
- the republic might even have the   power to develop its own cheaper 
but comparably effective variation. But there are other strategic purchases that 
Poland has made to improve both its ground   and anti-air capabilities, such as the 500 
HIMARS rocket launchers, which were acquired   from the U.S. for $10 Billion. HIMARS or High 
Mobility Artillery Rocket Systems have proved   indispensable in Ukraine for their ability to 
penetrate through Russian anti-missile defenses,   and are likely to become a staple of NATO’s 
military arsenal in future conflicts. Poland's own missile defense 
system has been improved by   a $4.75 billion order of Patriot 
missiles from the United States. Not to neglect aerial combat, Poland is also 
looking to buy an array of helicopters and drones   from America or whatever other ally will provide 
such equipment. 48 FA50 light attack aircraft have   also been purchased from South Korea to diversify 
the speed and mobility of Poland’s air support. The mustering of all these impressive 
pieces of military hardware could lead   to the fulfillment of Poland’s 
promise to itself and its allies:   becoming “the strongest military power 
on land in central and Eastern Europe.” The United States military understands 
the key importance of Poland’s location,   and agreed to allow their 5th Army Corps to 
reside permanently within the country. Poland   developing more potent land forces is the most 
sensical option for its own defense, as well as   giving the republic a distinctly advantageous 
position as the eastern bulwark of NATO. The ease with which Poland can roll out 
the heavy artillery in mainland Europe   is especially relevant because of the ongoing 
imperialist actions of Russia. The conflict in   Ukraine is only the most recent example of Russian 
aggression, and given that Poland shares a border   with Ukraine - there is a lot of justification for 
Poland to be concerned about its own protection. Russian military command has all but signaled 
direct hostility towards Poland with inflammatory   and dehumanizing statements such 
as those made by Dmitry Medvedev,   deputy chairman of the Russian Security Council: “I see no point in maintaining diplomatic 
relations with Poland. This state must   not exist for us while there is no one 
but Russophobes in power and Ukraine is   full of Polish mercenaries, who should be 
ruthlessly exterminated like stinky rats.” Further remarks from the Kremlin indicate 
a desire to “deNazify” Poland in a blatant   attempt to justify the possibility of another 
annexation effort. In the process, Russia has   also removed memorials that honored Polish 
people killed at the hands of Soviet Soldiers   in the past - a callous and ahistorical attempt 
at downplaying their country's own brutal past. Threats of nuclear brinkmanship in the 
form of stationing missiles on Poland’s   eastern border have also raised concerns 
about how far Russia is willing to go. This open hostility towards Poland from the 
Russian government is distressing, but sadly   not unfamiliar. Just like in the years leading 
up to World War II, an expansionist dictator   with a mind for empire-building is threatening 
to conquer much of Europe - and in this case,   it’s not Germany but the other country 
that Poland has a troubled history with. But it's not just invading forces like Russia 
that history has made Poland wary of. The German   invasion and the Soviet occupation both share 
one common factor: when Poland was in need,   the other allied superpowers did not readily give 
them the help they requested. On a national level,   the push for self-sufficiency is not simply a 
philosophical preference for growing stronger,   it’s also a bitter acknowledgement that 
the nation may have nobody else to rely on. On 2022’s Polish Independence Day, the country's 
Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki said:   “The Polish army must be so powerful that it does 
not have to fight due to its strength alone.” The silver lining to this current moment 
is that the world is much more aware of   and engaged in the project of stopping Russia 
from carrying on its war in Ukraine. The United   States has shown itself to be a stalwart ally 
of Ukraine in regards to sending weapons and   denouncing Russia’s actions, and the emphasis 
on foreign policy under the administration of   President Biden could set a precedent that 
extends to Poland in the case of the worst. The former deputy assistant 
secretary general of NATO,   Dr. Shea, had this to say in 
regards to Poland’s militarization: “What Poland is doing is very welcome, but 
it won't make sense going [at] it alone.” This statement could be seen as an 
indication that NATO has no intention   of under-serving Poland in any upcoming 
skirmish, but skepticism remains among   Polish leadership as larger and more concrete 
promises have been made and broken before. Yet, Morawieki has not signaled any lack of trust 
in his allies, and disagreed with former President   Emmanuel Macron of France over whether the goal 
of European autonomy from the United States is   a worthwhile one. While visiting Washington, the 
Prime Minister made clear his intention to seek a   closer bond between Poland and the United States, 
stating that if “countries west of Poland” do not   understand why such an alliance is necessary it 
was “probably due to historical circumstances.” “Poland is trying to maintain the most common 
sense policy based on a close alliance with the   United States within the framework of the European 
Union, and this is the best path for Poland.” Though the fighting in Ukraine is far from over, 
and Poland has not officially entered the war,   being prepared for a ground invasion from 
Russia is worth the cost in their eyes.   Poland cannot allow itself to suffer 
a modern equivalent to the Charge at   Krojanty - not in sensationalized mythology 
or cold hard reality. And furthermore,   it might not be able to afford to wait for 
distant allies in the event of a Russian   attack or rely on the goodwill of other world 
powers in case of a challenge on its sovereignty. In order to be NATO’s first 
line of defense against Russia,   Poland has chosen to spend 3% of its GDP on 
defense - the highest allocation of defense   budget in its region. Greece is the second highest 
in Europe, with 2.8% of its GDP going to defense,   and its pockets for foreign weapons 
aren’t as deep. At least not as deep   as Poland is willing to go in order to face 
down the profound threat of Putin’s Russia. To quote Polish General Rajmund 
Andrzejczak in a recent press conference,   “We just took our suitcases with money 
and [we’re] going like Hell around the   world and trying to buy… It’s not a matter of 
money. I’ve got money. I’ve got big money.” The aforementioned tanks and rocket launchers are 
only the beginning, but as for where the economic   wealth to pay for this surge of military might 
came from, the answers are surprisingly simple.   The diaspora of Polish tradespeople who emigrated 
to other countries over the past century has   begun to return to the country with much higher 
net worths for themselves and their families. The capitalist success of Poles overseas in the 
United States of America, as well as throughout   several regions of Europe, has directly caused 
wealth to flow back into their homeland. Wealth   that can now be used to reinvest in a future 
without the threat of being bowled over by a   mightier power. Whether the GDP of Poland 
can truly bear the weight of this costly   investment remains to be seen, but the 
success story has a sensational appeal   to it. This emphasis on the achievements of 
talented workers who are loyal to and enrich   their nation is, in some ways, a modern 
reflection of the values of solidarity. But if all these indications are correct, 
non-violence may not be the direction in   which the country goes. With all this military 
spending in the name of maintaining stability   and self-sufficiency, Poland runs the risk of 
accelerating tensions and creating a deepened   climate of hostility. The newfound focus on 
expanding the defense budget could be exactly   what the right-wing Law and Justice Party is 
looking for to maintain power and approval,   and what would begin as a justified 
emphasis on national security could   grow into warmongering rhetoric if left unchecked. Robert Czulda, a military expert from the Casimir 
Pulaski Foundation, is not so convinced of the   practicality of the plan nor impressed by 
the appeals to the collective. He states: “It seems highly likely that such a large scale 
of planned orders is largely driven by a political   populism, aimed at gaining popularity 
here and now, rather than to be a real,   comprehensive, and well-thought-out plan for 
harmoniously strengthening the armed forces.” On the other hand, historical precedent has 
shown us that appeasement is ineffective when   it comes to totalitarians like Putin - and show 
of force might be the only viable solution to   the mounting problem of Russian imperialism. 
Whether it’s a ploy for re-election or not,   the fact of the matter is that the economic 
risk is a less devastating one than the   risk of Poland being subject to one more 
occupation by an autocracy. Should these   ambitious goals be completed within their 
time frame, Poland is all but guaranteed to   become a military power that can serve 
as NATO’s backbone within its region. Now check out “What If China Attacked 
Russia,” or click this other video instead.|||I just need a friend My place on earth, 
I never had one They told me
That I would find my way Small town girl
In an endless world All alone Will you listen to me
Put together every day of mine Just someone like you Will be by my side
Will be by my side I just need a friend Tell me there's someone who
Would fly me to the moon And never let me go We are beautiful like butterflies
Even if we break our wings It's so good to have you Together it's easier to go against the wind Today, hope is what I have That each of us will find somewhere a home Too many tears
In the big world And us in the middle Will you listen to me
Put together every day of mine Just someone like you Will be by my side
Will be by my side It's so good to have you Together it's easier to go against the wind Just like me
You have restless dreams Will you be here when I get lost
And will you look for the stars with me It's so good to have you
We are building a new world If we find each other
I would be your someone too Even though we have so many differences
We have more in common today I just need a friend It's so good to have you We are beautiful like butterflies
Even if we break our wings I just need a friend Are you the one for me  |||JOINING ME NOW ON THIS IS MAREK MAGIEROWSKI THE POLISH AMBASSADOR TO THE UNITED STATES MR. AMBASSADOR, THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR JOINING US. >> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME. >> I'D LIKE TO GET YOU TO WEIGH IN ON WHY POLAND FEELS THE NEED RIGHT NOW TO SEND 10,000 OF ITS FORCES TO ITS BORDER WITH BELARUS? >> LET ME TELL YOU FIRST ONE THING. I AM SO PROFOUNDLY PROUD SEEING THIS IMAGES OF THE ABRAMS TANKS ROLLING ON IN THE STREETS OF BEIRUT'S CAPITOL AHEAD OF TOMORROW'S MILITARY PARADE. IT'S ANOTHER PROOF OF OUR STEADFAST ALLIANCE OF THIS EXTREMELY STRONG BOND WHICH EXISTS AND HAS ALWAYS EXISTED BETWEEN POLAND AND AMERICA. WE ARE, BACK TO YOUR POINT ABOUT ENGAGEMENT IN THE BORDER AREA ALONG THE POLISH BELARUSIAN BORDER, WE ARE COMMITTING MORE TROOPS AND MORE MILITARY EQUIPMENT AND WE ARE DEPLOYING MORE UNITS TO THAT AREA. AND WE CONSIDER IT TO BE AN OBLIGATION, NOT OUR DUTY TO DEFEND OURSELVES. BUT ALSO TO PROTECT THE EXTERNAL BORDERS OF NATO AND THE EUROPEAN AND THE PLACE OF RUSSIA'S AND BELARUS -- BELARUSIAN IS GROWING AGGRESSIVENESS. >> WHAT SIGNS, ASIDE FROM WHAT WE'RE SEEING PUBLICLY, AND THAT IS EVEN PRESIDENT LUKASHENKO IRRESPONSIBLY SUGGESTING THAT HE HAD TO PULL BACK WAGNER FORCES WHO WANTED TO GO OVER THE BORDER INTO POLAND. WHAT OTHER SIGNS ARE YOU SEEING THAT WORRY YOU ABOUT THE CURRENT SITUATION THERE SPECIFICALLY AFTER THAT FAILED MUTINY OF THE WAGNER GROUP LED BY YEVGENY PRIGOZHIN AND THE INCREASE IN THE NUMBER OF WAGNER FORCES WE HAVE NOW SEEN IN VALOROUS. >> I DO BELIEVE THAT MANY OF OUR VIEWERS ARE AWARE OF THE FACT THAT POLAND IS THE ONLY COUNTRY IN EUROPE WHICH BORDERS THOSE THREE NEIGHBORS, RUSSIA, BELARUS, AND UKRAINE AND SO YOU CAN IMAGINE HOW VOLATILE THE GEOPOLITICAL SITUATION IN THE REGION HAS BECOME RECENTLY. SO WE HAVE TO BRACE OURSELVES FOR FURTHER PROVOCATIONS. NOT ONLY IN POLAND, ALSO IN THE THEATER AND ALSO OTHER BALTIC COUNTRIES. JUST A FEW WEEKS AGO, SOCIAL PLATFORMS AND POLAND WERE FLOODED WITH FAKE IMAGES OF WAGNER MERCENARIES PENETRATING INTO POLAND AND OPERATING ON POLISH SOIL. JUST THIS MORNING, TO WAGNER OPERATIVES WERE DETAINED BY POLISH AUTHORITIES ACCUSED OF DISTRIBUTING PROPAGANDA MATERIALS IN WARSAW AMONG MANY OTHER CITIES. AND SO I THINK THAT THE SITUATION IS BECOMING REALLY VERY SENSITIVE FROM OUR PEOPLE, NOT ONLY IN TERMS OF OUR POLITICAL ENGAGEMENT, BUT ALSO IN TERMS OF OUR MILITARY INVOLVEMENT IN THAT AREA. >> AS WE KNOW, THE PLAN TO SEND 10,000 TROOPS TO THE POLICE EASTERN BORDER, AND RUSSIA HAS JUST ANNOUNCED THAT IT'S PLANNING TO DISCUSS AT LEAST SENDING RUSSIAN TROOPS TO ITS WESTERN BORDER, CITING POLAND OF ALL REASONS FOR THE JUSTIFICATION FOR THIS. I WOULD LIKE TO HEAR OR HAVE YOU LISTEN TO WHAT RUSSIAN DEFENSE MINISTER SERGEI SHOIGU SAID ABOUT THIS ISSUE. >> [INTERPRETER] THERE ARE EXISTING RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH THE MILITARIZATION OF POLAND WHICH HAS BECOME THE MAIN INSTRUMENT OF THE UNITED STATES AND ANTI RUSSIAN POLICY WARSAW ANNOUNCED THE INTENTION TO BUILD, ACCORDING TO THE POLLS, THE MOST POWERFUL ARMY ON THE CONTINENT. >> WHAT ARE THE RISKS THAT HE IS TALKING ABOUT, IF YOU HAVE ANY INSIGHT INTO THAT? >> OF COURSE WE WOULD LIKE TO AVOID ANY CONFRONTATION A DIRECT MILITARY PUSH WITH THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION. WE DON'T WANT TO DRAG NATO INTO A POTENTIAL WAR WITH RUSSIA, ESPECIALLY TODAY BUT WE KNOW VERY WELL, ON THE OTHER HAND, THAT THE RUSSIAN ARMY FOR EXAMPLE HAS PERFORMED SO MISERABLY IN UKRAINE, AND NO WONDER THAT THE RUSSIANS ARE PRETTY MUCH PREOCCUPIED WITH OUR EFFORTS TO REINFORCE OUR MILITARY CAPABILITIES NOT ONLY ALONG OUR BORDER WITH BELARUS AND WITH THE -- BUT GENERALLY. WE HAVE ENTERED A PATH OF MAYBE NOT MILITARIZATION AS SHOIGU HAS JUST SAID, BUT TRYING TO BUILD ONE OF THE STRONGEST ARMIES IN EUROPE AGAIN, BECAUSE POLAND HAS BEEN PERCEIVED UNTIL RECENTLY AS A NET RECIPIENT OF SECURITY. WE ARE NOW TRANSITIONING INTO THE ROLE OF NET PROVIDER OF SECURITY, ALSO FOR OUR PARTNERS IN THE EUROPEAN UNION AND NATO. YOU KNOW, RUSSIAN OFFICIALS, MR. SHOIGU BEING ONE OF THEM, LOVE TO SWALLOW AND KOOKY CONSPIRACY THEORIES WE HAVE ALSO HEARD HIS REMARKS ABOUT OUR WILLINGNESS TO INVADE WESTERN UKRAINE. OF COURSE THOSE REMARKS ARE AS OUTLANDISH AS IT GETS, AND WE HAVE ALREADY REBOUNDED MANY OF THOSE ALLEGATIONS ON MULTIPLE OCCASIONS THERE IS OF COURSE A KIND OF ADVISORY AND THAT PART OF THE WORLD, BUT I THINK THAT NOBODY HAS ANY DOUBT WHATSOEVER WHO IS THE AGGRESSOR AND WHO IS COMMITTED PROFOUNDLY TO DEFEND THEIR BORDERS AND THEIR SECURITY IN CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPE. >> IN A RECENT INTERVIEW ON CNN, YOUR DEPUTY FOREIGN MINISTER ACCUSED BOTH MOSCOW AND MINSK OF TRANSPORTING ILLEGAL MIGRANTS TO THE POLISH BORDER IN ORDER TO DESTABILIZE THE REGION. THAT HAS ECHOES OF WHAT WE SAW IN 2021 BEFORE THE FEBRUARY 2022 INVASION. LARGE SCALE INVASION OF UKRAINE BY RUSSIA AND THAT WAS POLAND ACCUSING PRESIDENT LUKASHENKO OF MANUFACTURING A MIGRANT CRISIS OF SORTS AT ITS BORDER. AND THAT'S YOU KNOW, SOME OF YOUR TACTICS AND POLAND'S RESPONSE TO THIS DREW CONDEMNATION FROM YOUR EU ALLIES AND MEMBERS AS WELL. THERE IS AN ELECTION COMING UP IN YOUR COUNTRY IN JUST A FEW MONTHS IN OCTOBER. IS THERE ANY REASON FOR YOUR ALLIES ONCE AGAIN TO BE CONCERNED THAT PERHAPS THIS BORDER ISSUE IS BEING POLITICIZED? >> UNFORTUNATELY, WE CAN EXPECT BOTH RUSSIA AND BELARUS TO WEAPONIZE ANOTHER MIGRATION CRISIS ALONG THAT BORDER. ORCHESTRATED BY BELARUS, BUT QUITE CLEARLY INSTIGATED BY THE KREMLIN AS YOU KNOW, WE HAVE ERECTED A FENCE ALONG THE BORDER IN ORDER TO PREVENT ANOTHER CRISIS OF THIS, AND AGAIN, I CAN ONLY REITERATE THAT IT IS OUR OBLIGATION TO DEFEND NOT ONLY POLAND BUT ALSO THE EXTERNAL BORDERS OF THE EUROPEAN UNION. AND WE ARE DEALING WITH A UNPREDICTABLE THOUGH IT IS ABSOLUTELY IMPOSSIBLE TO FORESEE WHAT WILL HAPPEN IN THE MONTHS TO COME, BUT I AM SURE THAT WE HAVE TO REMAIN VIGILANT FOR THIS KIND OF OPERATION, THIS KIND OF HYBRID ATTACKS AND ASYMMETRICAL WARFARE. ON THE PART OF BOTH THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION AND BELARUSIAN. >> THEN WE SEE ANYTHING SIMILAR? ARE YOU EXPECTING THESE SIMILAR TACTICS AS THE ONES DEPLOYED AND 2021 THE LAST TIME WE DISCUSS THOSE BORDER ISSUES? >> I GOT NO DOUBTS WHATSOEVER THAT BOTH THE LUKASHENKO E. JEAN AND PRESIDENT PUTIN WOULD BE READY TO DO ANYTHING TO INTIMIDATE POLAND AND OTHER NATO COUNTRIES. THIS IS ONE OF THE VERY FEW THINGS THAT RUSSIANS AND BELARUSIANS, I'M TALKING ABOUT THE RULING OF LEADS OF COURSE, NOT ABOUT PEOPLES AND NATIONS, BUT THIS IS ONE OF THE VERY FEW THINGS THAT THEY EXCEL AT INTIMIDATING AND INSTILLING FEAR AND WESTERN SOCIETIES, AND THAT IS WHY WE HAVE TO BRACE OURSELVES FOR FURTHER PROVOCATIONS OF THIS SORT. >> YOU, AS WE HAVE NOTICED, I HAVE BEEN ONE OF THE UKRAINE'S STAUNCHEST SUPPORTERS THROUGHOUT THIS WAR, INCREASING YOUR OWN DEFENSE BUDGET CLOSE TO 4% AT THIS POINT AND PROVIDE UKRAINE WITH A LOT OF FINANCIAL AID AS WELL AS A MILITARY AND HUMANITARIAN AID AS WELL. I'M CURIOUS TO GET YOUR RESPONSE TO WHAT YOU ARE SEEING THERE IN WASHINGTON PLAY OUT HERE IN THE UNITED STATES AS WE ENTER OUR OWN PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION SEASON SPECIFICALLY WITH REGARDS TO THE REPUBLICAN PARTY AND SOME OF THE STATEMENTS THAT WE ARE HEARING FROM THE FRONT RUNNER, FORMER PRESIDENT TRUMP ON HIS KNEE IS ON THE WAR AND FUTURE AID TO UKRAINE THAT WOULD BE IN QUESTION BUT NOT JUST, THAT THERE IS A NEW CNN POLL THAT FOUND 55% OF AMERICANS, NOT JUST REPUBLICANS, BUT AMERICANS SAY THAT CONGRESS SHOULD NOT AUTHORIZE ADDITIONAL FUNDING TO SUPPORT UKRAINE. HOW IS THAT BEING REACTED TO IN WARSAW AND OTHER EUROPEAN CAPITALS? THAT IMPACTS OUR DIPLOMATIC WORK. WE ARE FOLLOWING THAT AS WELL. THE OTHER THING THAT I CAN TELL YOU, AS A DIPLOMAT, IS WE HAVE BEEN INSISTING ON THE NECESSITY OF TALKING CONSTANTLY WITH AMERICAN LAWMAKERS, REACHING OUT TO THE AMERICAN PUBLIC OPINION, IN ORDER TO KEEP VIVID THE AND TRUST IN WHAT IS GOING ON IN EUROPE. THIS IS ALSO IN TERMS OF DIPLOMATIC EFFORTS IN ORDER TO HELP AND ALLOW UKRAINE TO NEW --
>> AMBASSADOR, WILL HAVE TO HAVE YOU BACK ON TO CONTINUE THIS CONVERSATION. IN THE MEANTIME, THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME TODAY. WE APPRECIATE IT. >> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.|||either fellow travelers mark here with Walters room today we're in Warsaw Poland for things you don't do when you are here in Poland I'm gonna get off the started no need with number one before we get started with number one I'm gonna start at number zero the thing you need to know before you come here is don't tell or call the Polish Eastern Europeans you will not make any friends saying that if you look on the map you'll see the Poland is actually in the center of Europe a little bit north but it's in the center of Europe and they like to be called central Europeans not Eastern European so I want to get that one out of the way first because that's probably your quickest don't really upset people so remember don't say Eastern Europe okay now when you're gonna meet the Polish people here are second or I guess our first don't for you is don't shake hands or say goodbye over the threshold like in a doorway people really don't like that so either make it a choose your side are you in the door or you out of the door when you shake hands and say goodbye just one of those little things there and if you do get to meet some Polish people and they invite you to your home when you go there if you see they're wearing slippers or they're not wearing shoes you don't wear your shoes in the house either it's kind of rude that way so just three quick little ones to start off with just to give you some ideas of hospitality here in Poland so our next don't for you has to do with the language look don't underestimate how helpful a few words of Polish will be for you and your visit here whether you're up in Gdansk you're down at Cracow or Lublin or wherever because we all know that no one watching this video price speaks polish unless you're polish by ancestry and the thing is is the poles know that and so they learned that you know theologically speaking English or German or Russian and stuff like that to help out the tourists but the thing is if you know a free words and polish it really opens the door like people are really happy even if it's just like Jin Korea which is like thank you our pro scene which is pleased our Pivo which is beer I remember I was like people put a seemed like hey you know there is so happy with it and it really goes a long way to open up to people because seals the old note some people seem kind of dour and quiet and Stern sometimes and that's one way to open them up okay now our next don't for you is don't worry about busting your the bank when you come here to Poland pulling is extremely affordable country to visit hotels eating drinking all kinds of stuff making merry it is really cheap here also going to museums is really affordable as well so it's a nice place to check out that's why when you go to Krakow they get ten million tourists from you know high-end tourist alone low-end and low-income not well income but people are spending a lot of money on tourism because it's not a expensive place to be so that's the kind of a cool thing now my fifth don't for you kind of goes along with that cheap eating and drinking don't drink in public in Poland look you can get arrested or fined for drinking in public now you see this guys square here yes you can eat and drink at the restaurants and the bars like that no problem but if you're gonna like take up some wine or a beer some the local beer which are pretty good here and go take that to a park and drink there with your friends you can get in trouble with the cops so make sure you do not drink in public to go along with that don't don't forget you need to have an ID with you all the time if you don't want to carry your passport with you what I do is I actually have my driver's license from home and a photocopy of my passport with my passport locked up back at the hotel so you do have that because the cops could ask you for it if they really wanted to they usually don't bother the tourists so it's not that big of a deal but just in case so you know now our next stunt for you is don't try to pay with big Bill's now big Bill's are like fifty swati's or 100 Sporty's like 100 or 50 it was like under 20 because people ask you all do you have anything smaller they're always gonna ask for a smaller bill the thing is when you go to the ATMs it gives you 50 s and a hundreds when you go get a beer or something like that it's you know seven or eight and like odd you have some smaller bills you have some smaller bills so when you go to museums you go to like big stores and stuff like that use the bigger bills there the hundreds and stuff like that to break them into tens and 20s so then you can go get your little snacks maybe you want your little you know Polish donut or you want to go get a hot dog or something like that when you're here or just grab a beer you need that change ok so don't use the big Bill's here right another don't I half you don't forget to tip when you are here usually a tip ten to fifteen percent ten percent normal fifteen percent of its good but you can look on the men when some restaurants already put that 10% on there I know the place I waited here on the square and I remember don't but you're not gonna bust the bank so it wasn't I hope didn't feel group table because it was so cheap the 10% was already included she was very nice and helpful I gave her a little bit extra on there no big deal okay and going along with that when you pay your bill the Louis asks you don't play with credit card or cash if you're gonna pay with cash if you put the money in the little thing and give it to them don't say thank you unless you want them to keep all the money okay so let's say you know you got a hundred 110 bill and you give them 150 you say thank you or genku you know they go a 40 40 40 tip for me and they'll just walk away with it you need to tell them here is this then they'll bring your change back and then you leave your tip like that so you have those things there what I try to do is just have the tip already there now you might tell them look I want to pay 140 and so they'll just have the tip from there and give your ten back if you have a hundred and a 50 no big deal they're my tenth don't feel is don't be late the polls are actually pretty much an on time kind of people like their German neighbors if you're going to be late to somebody's house you're gonna visit make sure you call or text them or whatsapp them before so they know you're coming behind because it's kind of rude to be late when you are here I mean we were at the muse I was at the Museum this morning and it's supposed to open up at 10:00 the guy unlocked it like in 1001 if you were like come on it says 10 o'clock let's go you know so you do have that there so make sure you are on time and my last don't for you is don't fall for the nature tourism propaganda in Poland look you'll see lots and lots and lots and lots and lots of tourism videos about the nature of Poland and there are some beautiful nature's here the Tatras mountains in the south bicycle pay me goes you know skiing in the summer or summer in the winter you can go to the Missourian lakes the north it's just beautiful there's Castle there there's all kinds of great nature here but look it was your first time to Pullen focus on the cool cities that are here Krakow is amazing with the with the Town Square and the cloth hall and the churches in the vaudeville Hill and you can go out to see Auschwitz and Birkenau the concentration cancers are very moving you go up to Gdansk in the very north and see that city it's beautiful Lublin come here and check out Warsaw and you can get around pretty easy don't worry about getting around I guess there'll be another one don't worry about getting around and Poland there's lots of buses and trains that go all over the place it is a big country so it does take time but don't be too worried about it anyway do some of the don'ts we have about Poland I actually have another don't video just for Krakow that don'ts of Krakow which I hope you'll check out if you do like videos like this we put out two travel videos every week every Wednesday and Saturday so please do click that subscribe button we really do appreciate it and you can always find us on Instagram Facebook Twitter obviously YouTube and we really appreciate those likes and subscriptions oh in comments so I'll say bye from Warsaw|||HI I'M RICK STEVES BACK WITH MORE OF THE BEST OF EUROPE. THIS TIME, WE'RE IN POLAND, WITH SUCH A RICH HISTORY
AND A PROMISING FUTURE.  DZIEN DOBRY.  DZIEN DOBRY. ITS UPS AND DOWNS, BUT POLAND HAS BEEN PARTICULARLY
HARD HIT THROUGH THE AGES. THANKFULLY, THESE ARE
GOOD TIMES FOR POLAND. IT'S A MEMBER
OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, ITS ECONOMY IS THRIVING, AND IT'S NEVER BEEN
MORE FUN TO VISIT. POLAND'S TWO MUST-SEE CITIES
ARE WARSAW AND KRAKOW.   ENJOYING THE HIGHLIGHTS
 OF POLAND,   WE'LL VISIT ITS GRAND
 CULTURAL CENTER, KRAKOW;   MAKE A PILGRIMAGE
 TO POLAND'S HOLIEST SIGHT;   REMEMBER THE HORRORS
 OF AUSCHWITZ;   DESCEND INTO A MAGICAL
 SALT MINE;   FEEL THE JAZZY BEAT;   BE INSPIRED
 BY WORLD WAR II HEROICS;  SLAM DOWN A POLISH TRADITION... WHOA, YEAH!   ...AND EXPERIENCE THE PHOENIX
 OF EUROPE, WARSAW.   IN THE NORTHEAST CORNER
 OF EUROPE,   POLAND IS ONE OF THE LARGEST
 COUNTRIES ON THE CONTINENT.   WE'LL VISIT ITS HISTORIC
 CAPITAL, KRAKOW,   SIDE-TRIP TO A SALT MINE
 AND TO A CONCENTRATION CAMP,   THEN HEAD FOR POLAND'S
 MODERN CAPITAL, WARSAW. WE START IN KRAKOW. IT'S LIKE THE BOSTON OF POLAND,
A CHARMING AND VITAL CITY BUZZING WITH HISTORY,
COLLEGE STUDENTS AND TOURISTS. EVEN THOUGH POLAND'S
POLITICAL CAPITAL MOVED FROM HERE TO WARSAW
400 YEARS AGO, KRAKOW REMAINS THE COUNTRY'S CULTURAL
AND INTELLECTUAL CENTER.   THE CITY'S HISTORY IS RICH,
 ITS SIGHTS ARE FASCINATING,   AND THE PRICES ARE SOME
 OF EUROPE'S LOWEST.   THIS IS A COUNTRY
 WHERE THE MOST EXPENSIVE CAFE   ON THE MOST EXPENSIVE PERCH   SERVES DRINKS FOR A FRACTION
 OF WHAT YOU'D EXPECT.   THE CHARM OF TODAY'S KRAKOW
 LIES IN ITS MEDIEVAL ROOTS. KRAKOW GREW WEALTHY FROM TRADE
IN THE 12th CENTURY. TRADERS PASSING THROUGH WERE
REQUIRED TO STOP FOR A FEW DAYS AND SELL THEIR GOODS
AT A DISCOUNT. LOCAL MERCHANTS THEN RESOLD
THEIR WARES AT A PROFIT AND THE CITY THRIVED.  IN THE 13th CENTURY THE TARTARS
 -- A.K.A. THE MONGOLS --   SWEPT IN FROM ASIA
 AND DESTROYED KRAKOW.   RESILIENT KRAKOVIANS
 TOOK THIS OPPORTUNITY   TO REBUILD THEIR CITY
 WITH A NEAR-PERFECT GRID PLAN,   A STRIKING CONTRAST
 TO THE NARROW, MAZE-LIKE LANES   OF MOST MEDIEVAL TOWNS. EVENTUALLY KRAKOW'S POWER WANED. WARSAW EMERGED
AS THE DOMINANT CITY IN POLAND AND KRAKOW BECAME
A PROVINCIAL BACKWATER OF THE HABSBURG EMPIRE
RULED FROM VIENNA. WHILE WARSAW WAS
IN THE SPHERE OF MOSCOW AND, THEREFORE, MORE EASTERN
AND CONSERVATIVE, KRAKOW HAS LONG BEEN
MORE WESTERN AND LIBERAL.   KRAKOW EMERGED FROM WORLD
 WAR II VIRTUALLY UNSCATHED.   IT SLUMBERED UNDER COMMUNISM   UNTIL POLAND WON ITS FREEDOM
 IN 1989.   TODAY, THE CITY IS POLAND'S
 LEADING TOURIST ATTRACTION,   WITH PLENTY
 OF TOP-NOTCH SIGHTS.   AFTER THE TARTARS
 DESTROYED THEIR CITY,   KRAKOVIANS BUILT
 THIS IMPOSING WALL.   THE BIG, ROUND DEFENSIVE FORT
 STANDING OUTSIDE THE WALL   IS A BARBICAN.   IT PROVIDED EXTRA PROTECTION
 AT THE TOWN'S MAIN GATE.   BY THE 19th CENTURY, THE CITY
 WALL WAS NO LONGER NECESSARY.   LOCALS TORE DOWN MOST OF IT,
 FILLED IN THE MOAT   AND PLANTED TREES.   TODAY, THIS DELIGHTFUL
 AND PEOPLE-FRIENDLY GREENBELT,   A PARK CALLED THE PLANTY,
 CIRCLES KRAKOW'S OLD TOWN.   TO GET AWAY
 FROM THE TOURISTS' KRAKOW,   BIKE OR HIKE
 AROUND THE PLANTY   AND UP THE PARK
 THAT LINES THE VISTULA RIVER.   IF YOU THINK
 YOU'RE GOOD AT CHESS,   CHALLENGE ONE OF THESE GUYS.   NEARBY, THE IMPOSING
 ST. MARY'S CHURCH,  WITH ITS SOARING LOOKOUT TOWER,   HAS LONG BEEN AN ICON
 OF THE CITY.   EACH MIDDAY, CROWDS GATHER
 FOR A MEDIEVAL MOMENT   AS A NUN SWINGS OPEN   THE CHURCH'S MUCH-ADORED
 ALTARPIECE.   THIS EXQUISITE
 GOTHIC POLYPTYCH,   AN ALTARPIECE
 WITH PIVOTING PANELS,   WAS CARVED IN THE LATE 1400s
 BY VEIT STOSS.   ONE OF THE MOST IMPRESSIVE
 MEDIEVAL WOOD CARVINGS   IN EXISTENCE, IT DEPICTS
 THE DEATH OF THE VIRGIN   WITH EMOTION RARE
 IN GOTHIC ART.   ST. MARY'S CHURCH
 FACES KRAKOW'S   MARVELOUS MARKET SQUARE.   ONE OF EUROPE'S
 MOST GASP-WORTHY PUBLIC SPACES,   IT BUSTLES WITH LIFE.   THIS SQUARE
 IS WHERE KRAKOW LIVES.   KIDS PRACTICE BREAK DANCING,   HORSE CARRIAGES
 TAKE YOU FOR A RIDE,   AND FOLK BANDS
 ADD TRADITIONAL COLOR.  WHEN BUILT IN THE 13th CENTURY,   THIS WAS THE BIGGEST SQUARE
 IN MEDIEVAL EUROPE.   BACK THEN YOU COULDN'T JUST
 SELL THINGS ANYWHERE.  EVERYTHING HAD TO BE SOLD HERE,
 ON THE MARKET SQUARE.   OR IN THE CLOTH HALL.   IN THE MIDDLE AGES,   THIS WAS WHERE
 THE CLOTH SELLERS   HAD THEIR MARKET STALLS.   TODAY, WHETHER YOU'RE LOOKING
 FOR A FANCY EGG,   SOME TRADITIONAL EMBROIDERY,   OR A LITTLE AMBER,   IT'S YOUR ONE-STOP
 SOUVENIR SHOPPING ARCADE.   I FIND POLISH CULTURE
 AND HISTORY   BOTH COMPELLING AND CONFUSING.   MY FRIEND AND FELLOW
 TOUR GUIDE, KASIA DERLICKA,   IS JOINING US TO BE SURE
 WE GET THINGS JUST RIGHT. LET'S GO TO A VERY
SPECIAL PLACE. IT'S CLOSE TO EVERY
POLISH HEART. IT'S WAWEL, AND POLAND
ACTUALLY BEGINS IN WAWEL.   WAWEL HILL IS SACRED GROUND
 TO THE POLISH PEOPLE,   A SYMBOL OF POLISH ROYALTY
 AND INDEPENDENCE.   A CASTLE HAS STOOD HERE
 SINCE THE 11th CENTURY.   TODAY, WAWEL IS THE MOST
 VISITED SIGHT IN ALL POLAND.   THE HIGHLIGHT OF THE ENTIRE
 CASTLE COMPL   IS THE CATHEDRAL.   WAWEL CATHEDRAL IS POLAND'S
 NATIONAL CHURCH,   ITS WESTMINSTER ABBY.   TO POLES, THIS CHURCH
 IS THE NATIONAL MAUSOLEUM.  IT HOLDS THE TOMBS  OF POLAND'S GREATEST RULERS
 AND HISTORIC FIGURES.  POLAND IS DEVOUTLY CATHOLIC.  SEVENTY-FIVE PERCENT
 OF ITS NEARLY 40 MILLION PEOPLE  ARE PRACTICING CATHOLICS.  POPE JOHN PAUL II
 WAS A HOMETOWN BOY  AND SERVED RIGHT HERE
 AS ARCHBISHOP OF KRAKOW  BEFORE BEING CALLED TO ROME.  CATHOLICISM DEFINES THE POLES,  HOLDING THEM TOGETHER
 WHEN NOTHING ELSE COULD. IMAGINE, POLAND WAS CRUNCHED BETWEEN PROTESTANT GERMANY
AND ORTHODOX RUSSIA. DURING THE PARTITION
IN THE 19th CENTURY, WE DIDN'T EVEN SHOW
ON THE MAP, BUT WE SURVIVED, THANKS TO BEING POLISH AND
THANKS TO BEING CATHOLICS. AND DURING COMMUNISM, IT WAS ALSO VERY DIFFICULT
AND VERY DARK, BUT WE EXPRESSED OUR FREEDOM
AND OUR POLITICAL DISSENT BY GOING TO MASS. COMPARED TO THE REST OF EUROPE,  POLISH CHURCHES ARE ALIVE WITH
 PEOPLE PRACTICING THEIR FAITH.  RESPECTFUL TOURISTS
 ARE WELCOME. SOME COME TO WORSHIP AND OTHERS
 TO REMEMBER LEADING FIGURES  IN POLISH HISTORY,
 SUCH AS KAZIMIERZ THE GREAT. IF YOU'RE GOING TO REMEMBER
ONE POLISH KING, REMEMBER KAZIMIERZ THE GREAT, WHO RULED POLAND FROM KRAKOW
IN THE 14th CENTURY. KAZIMIERZ WAS ONE OF THOSE
LARGER-THAN-LIFE MEDIEVAL KINGS WHO LEFT HIS MARK
ON ALL FRONTS. HE WAS A GREAT WARRIOR,
DIPLOMAT, PATRON OF THE ARTS,
AND WOMANIZER.  HIS SCRIBES BRAGGED KAZIMIERZ
 FOUND POLAND MADE OF WOOD  AND LEFT IT
 MADE OF BRICK AND STONE.  HE EVEN MADE IT
 ONTO THE 50 ZLOTY NOTE. MOST OF ALL,
KAZIMIERZ WAS REMEMBERED FOR BEING A TOLERANT
AND PROGRESSIVE KING. IN THE 14th CENTURY, WHEN OTHER
NATIONS WERE DEPORTING JEWS, KING KAZIMIERZ
ACTIVELY WELCOMED THEM. HE GRANTED THEM SPECIAL BANKING
AND TRADING PRIVILEGES AND ESTABLISHED
THE LONG-STANDING TRADITION OF POLAND BEING A SAFE HAVEN
FOR JEWS IN EUROPE.  THE NEIGHBORHOOD OF KAZIMIERZ,
 NAMED FOR THE KING,  WAS A THRIVING AND AUTONOMOUS
 JEWISH COMMUNITY FOR CENTURIES  WHEN MOST OF THE WORLD'S JEWS
 LIVED HERE IN POLAND.  IN THE 1930s, A QUARTER OF
 KRAKOW'S POPULATION WAS JEWISH.  WHILE FEW JEWS
 ACTUALLY STILL LIVE HERE,  THE SPIRIT OF THE JEWISH
 TRADITION SURVIVES.  PERHAPS THE BEST WAY
 TO ENJOY THAT  IS AT A KLEZMER
 DINNER CONCERT. [ lively music playing ]  SEVERAL RESTAURANTS
 OFFER JEWISH MUSIC  FROM 19th-CENTURY POLAND
 WITH THEIR TRADITIONAL CUISINE.  AS POLISH AND JEWISH CULTURE
 MINGLED HERE  FOR SO MANY CENTURIES,
 IT'S HARD TO DISTINGUISH  BETWEEN JEWISH
 AND POLISH CUISINE.  BUT WITH AMBIANCE LIKE THIS, IT'S CLEAR THAT JEWISH HERITAGE
 HERE IS A RICH ONE. [ applause ] WHILE POLES AND JEWS MANAGED TO
LIVE TOGETHER RELATIVELY WELL, THE STORY BECAME A NIGHTMARE WITH THE RISE OF NAZISM
IN THE 1930s. THIS THRIVING JEWISH COMMUNITY,
LIKE MOST IN EUROPE, WAS DECIMATED
DURING THE HOLOCAUST.  THE FRAGILE REMAINS
 OF THE COMMUNITY,  HISTORIC EXHIBITS
 AND ITS SYNAGOGUES  PROVIDE A MEDITATIVE LOOK
 AT HOW THE TOWN WAS WALLED IN  AND ITS RESIDENTS
 EVENTUALLY SHIPPED OFF  TO NEARBY CONCENTRATIOCAMPS.  ULTIMATELY, LESS THAN 10%
 OF KRAKOW'S JEWS  SURVIVED THE WAR
 AND THE DEATH CAMPS.  THE JEWISH CEMETERIES
 OF KAZIMIERZ  WERE DEFILED BY THE GERMANS,
 BULLDOZED BY NAZI TANKS.  HEADSTONES,
 BROKEN UNDER TANK TREADS, NOW CREATE A MOVING MOSAIC WALL
 AND HOLOCAUST MONUMENT. BUT THE MOST POWERFUL
HOLOCAUST MEMORIAL, I THINK IN ALL OF EUROPE, IS THE CONCENTRATION CAMP
HERE AT AUSCHWITZ, AN HOUR'S DRIVE FROM KRAKOW.  AUSCHWITZ WAS THE BIGGEST
 AND MOST NOTORIOUS  CONCENTRATION CAMP
 IN THE NAZI SYSTEM.  SEEING THE CAMP
 CAN BE DIFFICULT.  BUT AUSCHWITZ VICTIMS
 AND THEIR FAMILIES  WANT TOURISTS TO COME HERE,
 TO EXPERIENCE THE SCALE  AND THE MONSTROSITY
 OF THE PLACE IN HUMAN TERMS,  IN HOPE THAT THE HOLOCAUST
 WILL NEVER BE FORGOTTEN. THE NAZIS TURNED THIS ARMY BASE
 INTO A DEATH CAMP. THEY MURDERED OVER FOUR MILLION
 EUROPEAN JEWS IN POLAND.  OVER A MILLION PEOPLE,
 THE VAST MAJORITY OF THEM JEWS,  WERE SYSTEMICALLY EXTERMINATED
 HERE AT AUSCHWITZ.  THE NOTORIOUS GATE WELCOMED
 INMATES WITH A CRUEL LIE: "Arbeit Macht Frei,"
 WORK WILL SET YOU FREE.  FORMER CELL BLOCKS
 TELL THE STORY.  PEOPLE WERE TOLD
 THEY'D BE STARTING NEW LIVES  AND TO BRING LUGGAGE, CLEARLY
 LABELED WITH THEIR NAMES.  AFTER THEY WERE KILLED,  EVERYTHING OF VALUE
 WAS SORTED AND WAREHOUSED.  EYEGLASSES EVOKE HOW
 INDIVIDUALITY WAS TRASHED.  CRUTCHES AND PROSTHETIC LIMBS
 REMIND US  THAT THE FIRST PEOPLE
 EXTERMINATED  WERE MENTALLY AND PHYSICALLY
 ILL GERMAN CITIZENS.  CHILDREN'S CLOTHING;
 THE NAZIS SPARED NO ONE.  AND A SEEMINGLY ENDLESS
 MOUNTAIN OF SHOES.  IT'S HARD TO COMPREHEND
 THE NUMBERS.  HALLS ARE LINED
 WITHHOTOGRAPHS OF VICTIMS,  EACH MARKED WITH THE DATES
 OF ARRIVAL AND DATES OF DEATH.  INMATES RARELY SURVIVED
 MORE THAN A COUPLE OF MONTHS.  THE CREMATORIUM IS MARKED
 BY ITS CHIMNEY.  UP TO 700 PEOPLE AT A TIME
 COULD BE GASSED,  BUT IT REQUIRED TWO YS
 TO BURN THAT MANY BODIES HERE.  THE NAZIS DIDN'T LIKE
 THIS INEFFICIENCY, SO THEY BUILT A FAR BIGGER CAMP
 TWO MILES AWAY.  AUSCHWITZ II, OR BIRKENAU,
 WAS A VAST FACTORY OF DEATH,  HOLDING 100,000 PEOPLE.  A FEW BUILDINGS SURVIVE.  TRAIN TRACKS LED EFFICIENTLY
 PAST THE MAIN BUILDING,  INTO THE CAMP,
 AND TO THE DIVIDING PLATFORM. AND EVALUATED EACH PRISONER AS THEY STEPPED OFF THE TRAIN. IF HE POINTED TO THE RIGHT,
THE PRISONER MARCHED UNKNOWINGLY
DIRECTLY TO THE GAS CHAMBER. IF HE POINTED TO THE LEFT, THE PERSON WAS JUDGED
STRONG ENOUGH TO WORK AND WOULD LIVE A LITTLE LONGER. IT WAS HERE THAT FAMILIES
FROM ALL OVER EUROPE WERE TORN APART FOREVER.  UP TO A THOUSAND WERE PACKED
 INTO EACH OF THESE BUILDINGS.  EACH INMATE HAD AN ID NUMBER,  A BARRACK NUMBER
 AND A BED NUMBER.  TWO CHIMNEYS
 CONNECTED BY A BRICK DUCT   PROVIDED A LITTLE HEAT. THE BRICKS ARE WORN SMOOTH
BY COUNTLESS INMATES WHO SAT HERE
TO CATCH A LITTLE WARMTH IN THE MIDDLE
OF A BITTER POLISH WINTER. I CAN'T IMAGINE
HOW COLD THEY MUST HAVE BEEN, WET, HUNGRY
AND DRESSED IN RAGS.  THE GERMANS BOMBED
 THE SPRAWLING GASSING  AND CREMATION FACILITIES
 AS THEY RETREATED.  THE RUINS STAND AS A MEMORIAL.  THE GAS CHAMBERS, WHERE
 THE MASS KILLING WAS DONE,  WERE DISGUISED AS SHOWERS.  PEOPLE WERE GIVEN
 NUMBERED HOOKS  TO HANG THEIR CLOTHES ON,  CONNED INTO THINKING
 THEY WERE COMING BACK.  THE NAZIS DIDN'T WANT A PANIC.  THEN INMATES WERE PILED
 INTO THE SHOWER ROOM.  AT BIRKENAU, THE NAZIS
 GASSED AND CREMATED  OVER 4,000 PEOPLE PER DAY.  THE CAMP MONUMENT
 REPRESENTS GRAVESTONES  AND THE CHIMNEY
 OF A CREMATORIUM.  PLAQUES, IN EACH
 OF THE LANGUAGES SPOKEN  BY CAMP VICTIMS, EXPLAINED
 THE PURPOSE OF THIS MEMORIAL. THE MEMORIAL READS, "A CRY OF DESPAIR
AND A WARNING TO HUMANITY." SINCE LIBERATION DAY IN 1945, MILLIONS HAVE VISITED
THIS PLACE. HOPEFULLY, THEY TAKE AWAY
A DETERMINATION TO LEARN FROM THE HOLOCAUST
AND NEVER LET IT BE REPEATED. DRIVING THROUGH THE COUNTRYSIDE
 BACK TO KRAKOW REFRESHES TRAVELERS WITH A LOOK  AT TODAY'S PEACEFUL,
 RURAL POLAND.  FEW TRAVELERS TAKE TIME
 TO SEE THE COUNTRYSIDE.  STOP THE CAR, GET OUT,
 ENJOY AN INTIMATE LOOK  AT POLAND'S WELCOMING
 COUNTRY LIFE.  THE SMALL HOUSES
 ARE TRADITIONALLY USED  BY THREE GENERATIONS
 AT THE SAME TIME.  NINETEENTH-CENTURY HOUSES,
 THE FEW THAT SURVIVE,  OFTEN SPORT COLORFUL STRIPES.  BACK THEN, PARENTS ANNOUNCED
 THAT THEIR DAUGHTERS  WERE NOW ELIGIBLE
 BY GETTING OUT THE PAINT. ONCE THEY SAW THESE BLUE LINES,  VILLAGE BOYS WERE WELCOME
 TO COME A-COURTIN'.  THE REMARKABLE WIELICZKA SALT
 MINE, JUST OUTSIDE OF KRAKOW,  HAS BEEN PRODUCING SALT
 FOR EIGHT CENTURIES.  TODAY, IT'S BUSY NOT
 WITH MINERS, BUT WITH TOURISTS.  AFTER DESCENDING 200 FEET
 BELOW THE SURFACE,  YOU FOLLOW YOUR GUIDE
 ON A MILE-LONG DOWNHILL STROLL,  GETTING A MEMORABLE PEEK
 AT LIFE IN THE MINE.  IT'S VAST: NINE LEVELS,
 A THOUSAND FEET DEEP,  OVER A HUNDRED MILES
 OF TUNNELS.  FOR CENTURIES, GENERATIONS
 OF WIELICZKA MINERS  SPENT THEIR DAYLIGHT HOURS
 UNDERGROUND,  RARELY SEEING THE SUN.  PROUD MINERS CARVED FIGURES
 OF GREAT POLES OUT OF THE SALT.  YOU'LL SEE LEGENDS FROM THE
 DAYS OF KING KAZIMIERZ,  WHEN ONE-THIRD
 OF POLAND'S INCOME  CAME FROM THESE
 PRECIOUS DEPOSITS:  THE FAMOUS ASTRONOMER
 COPERNICUS,  AND EVEN THE REGION'S
 FAVORITE SON,  POPE JOHN PAUL II. THE TOTAL NUMBER OF CHAPELS
IN THIS MINE IS OVER 20. THIS IS THE OLDEST CHAPEL
IN THIS PART OF THE SALT MINE, ST. ANTHONY'S CHAPEL,
FROM THE 17th CENTURY. EVERYTHING HERE
IS MADE OF SALT. EVEN THE CHANDELIER
IS SALT CRYSTAL. VISITORS EXPECT
SALT WHITE, BUT IT'S BLACK,
BUT IT'S SALT. IF YOU DON'T TRUST ME,
YOU CAN TASTE IT. AND SALT PRESERVES
EVERYTHING. TAKE ME AS EXAMPLE. I AM 65 YEARS OLD AND I'M
STILL FRESH, STILL YOUNG.  THE MINE'S ENORMOUS
 UNDERGROUND CHURCH,  CARVED IN THE EARLY
 20th CENTURY,  IS STILL USED FOR MASS.  EVERYTHING HERE,  INCLUDING THE ORNATE ALTAR
 AND THE GRAND CHANDELIER,  IS HEWN FROM THIS UNDERWORLD
 OF SALT.  WHEN THE TOUR IS OVER, A SMALL BUT INDUSTRIAL-STRENGTH
 LIFT BEAMS YOU UP. [ banging ] [ clicking ] WHOOOA! [ jazz music playing ]  BACK IN KRAKOW,  CAP YOUR DAY IN ONE
 OF THE TOWN'S MANY JAZZ CLUBS.  LIKE MUCH OF POLAND, KRAKOW
 PULSES WITH COOL JAZZ NIGHTLY.  BACK IN THE 1950s,  JANUSZ MUNIAK WAS ONE OF THE
 ORIGINAL POLISH HEP CATS.  NOW HE OWNS THE JAZZ CLUB
 U MUNIAKA  AND JAMS REGULARLY HERE
 IN A MELLOW CELLAR.  AND JAMS REGULARLY HERE
 IN A MELLOW CELLAR.  AFTER A THREE-HOUR TRAIN RIDE
 FROM KRAKOW,  WE ARRIVE IN WARSAW.  WARSAW, PRONOUNCED VAR-SHA-VA
 IN POLISH,  IS POLAND'S CAPITAL
 AND BIGGEST CITY.  ITS OUTSKIRTS SPRAWL  WITH COMMUNIST-BUILT
 APARTMENT BLOCKS.  DOWNTOWN HAS A GOTHAM-CITY
 AMBIANCE, WITH BUSY BOULEVARDS,  EXPANSIVE SQUARES
 AND BLOCKY BUILDINGS.  THE PALACE OF CULTURE
 AND SCIENCE,  POLAND'S TALLEST BUILDING
 AT OVER 700 FEET,  IS A WARSAW LANDMARK.  IT WAS A GIFT FROM STALIN
 IN THE 1950s  THAT THE PEOPLE OF WARSAW
 COULDN'T REFUSE. BECAUSE IT WAS TO BE SOVIET IN
SUBSTANCE AND POLISH IN STYLE, SOVIET ARCHITECTS
ACTUALLY TOURED POLAND TO ABSORB THE LOCAL CULTURE
BEFORE STARTING THE PROJECT.  TO SHOW THEIR "GRATITUDE,"  THE PEOPLE OF WARSAW
 NICKNAMED IT "STALIN'S PENIS."  AND NESTLED IN THE CENTER OF
 ALL THIS UTILITARIAN CONCRETE  ARE PLENTY OF URBAN CHARMS.  WARSAW'S ROYAL WAY,  A MOSTLY BUSES-AND-TAXIS-ONLY
 SHOPPING BOULEVARD,  IS A LOCAL FAVORITE
 FOR STROLLING AND BROWSING...  AND ULTIMATELY LEADS YOU
 TO WARSAW'S HISTORIC OLD TOWN.  THE CASTLE LONG SERVED
 AS A ROYAL PALACE.  SIGISMUND III, THE GREAT KING
 WHO MOVED POLAND'S CAPITAL  FROM KRAKOW TO WARSAW IN 1596,
 STANDS OVERSEEING EVERYTHING.  AND THE CITY'S LEGENDARY
 MERMAID WELCOMES FRIENDS  WHILE KEEPING OUT FOES. THE GRAND CITY OF WARSAW
EXPERIENCED MORE THAN ITS SHARE OF HARDSHIPS
IN THE 20th CENTURY. AS WITH THE REST OF POLAND, THE REAL TRAGEDIES CAME
WITH THE NAZIS AND WORLD WAR II. DURING THE NAZI OCCUPATION,
THERE WERE TWO HEROIC UPRISINGS. FIRST, THE JEWISH
GHETTO UPRISING; THEN, ABOUT A YEAR LATER,
THE ENTIRE CITY ROSE UP AGAINST THE NAZIS
IN THE WARSAW UPRISING.  SEVERAL POWERFUL MUSEUMS ARE
 DEDICATED TO TELLING THE STORY.  BY THE 1930s, WARSAW,
 WITH 350,000 JEWS,  WAS ONE OF THE LARGEST
 JEWISH CITIES IN THE WORLD.  THE NAZIS ARRIVED IN 1939.  THEY CRAMMED WARSAW'S JEWS
 INTO A SINGLE NEIGHBORHOOD  AND SURROUNDED IT
 WITH A WALL.  AS MORE JEWISH PEOPLE WERE
 MOVED IN FROM THE COUNTRYSIDE,  WARSAW'S GHETTO WAS SOON
 THE MISERABLE HOME  OF WELL OVER A MILLION PEOPLE. BY 1942, HALF OF THE JEWS
IN THE GHETTO HAD DIED OF DISEASE
OR STARVATION. THE NAZIS BEGAN MOVING PEOPLE
OUT AT THE RATE OF 5,000 A DAY TO NEARBY DEATH CAMPS
LIKE AUSCHWITZ. THE POPULATION OF THE GHETTO
WAS DOWN TO ABOUT 60,000 WHEN THOSE WHO REMAINED
REALIZED THEY WOULD DIE EVEN IF THEY DID NOTHING. THEY DECIDED TO STAGE
A COURAGEOUS UPRISING.  HOPELESSLY OUTGUNNED
 BY THE NAZIS,  THE UPRISING WAS CRUSHED...  THE GHETTO WAS DEMOLISHED...  AND ITS RESIDENTS WERE KILLED.  BECAUSE OF THE FEROCITY
 OF NAZI HATRED,  NOTHING REMAINS OF THE GHETTO
 EXCEPT THE STREET PLAN  AND THE HEROIC SPIRIT OF THE
 PEOPLE WHO ONCE LIVED HERE.  GHETTO HEROES SQUARE,  NOW SURROUNDED BY BLAND
 SOVIET-STYLE APARTMENT BLOCKS,  MARKS THE HEART OF WHAT WAS
 THE JEWISH GHETTO. THE MONUMENT COMMEMORATES THOSE
 WHO FOUGHT AND DIED  FOR THE DIGNITY AND FREEDOM
 OF THE JEWISH NATION,  FOR A FREE POLAND, AND FOR THE
 LIBERATION OF HUMANKIND. ABOUT A YEAR LATER, THE REST OF THE CITY STAGED
ANOTHER ILL-FATED UPRISING, THE WARSAW UPRISING. BY 1944, AS THE SOVIET ARMY
DREW NEAR, IT WAS BECOMING CLEAR THE NAZIS' DAYS IN WARSAW
WERE NUMBERED. WITH THE EXPECTATION OF HELP
FROM SOVIET TANKS WHICH WERE GATHERING
JUST ACROSS THE RIVER, IT SEEMED LIKE THE RIGHT TIME
TO ATTACK.  THIS MONUMENT RECALLS  THE 50,000 POLISH
 RESISTANCE FIGHTERS,  THE BIGGEST UNDERGROUND ARMY
 IN MILITARY HISTORY,  WHO LAUNCHED A SURPRISE ATTACK
 ON THEIR NAZI OPPRESSORS.  THEY POURED OUT AT THE SEWERS
 AND CAUGHT THE NAZIS OFF-GUARD, INITIALLY HAVING GREAT SUCCESS.  IT WAS RIFLES, KNIVES
 AND MOLOTOV COCKTAILS  AGAINST AIR FORCE, TANKS
 AND ARTILLERY  AS THEY BATTLED COURAGEOUSLY
 FOR 63 DAYS.  BUT THE NAZIS REGROUPED  AND BRUTALLY PUT DOWN
 THE WARSAW UPRISING.  A QUARTER OF A MILLION POLES
 WERE KILLED. THROUGH ALL THIS, THE SOVIETS
SAT HERE, ACROSS THE RIVER. THEY WATCHED AND WAITED. AS THE SMOKE CLEARED
AND THE NAZIS RETREATED, THE RED ARMY MARCHED IN AND CLAIMED THE PILE OF RUBBLE
THAT WAS ONCE WARSAW.  TO ME,
 THE THRIVING CITY ITSELF  IS THE BEST MEMORIAL
 TO THOSE WARSAW HEROES.  TODAY, AS YOU EXPLORE, IT'S
 HARD TO IMAGINE THAT BY 1945, NEARLY TWO-THIRDS OF THE CITY'S
 PREWAR POPULATION WAS DEAD AND NOT A BUILDING WAS STANDING
 IN WARSAW'S OLD TOWN.  VIRTUALLY EVERYTHING YOU SEE
 IS REBUILT.  BEFORE THE WAR,
 WARSAW'S OLD TOWN SQUARE  WAS ONE OF THE MOST HAPPENING
 SPOTS IN CENTRAL EUROPE.  AND TODAY, EVEN
 THE HIGGLEDY-PIGGLEDY CHARM  OF THE BUILDINGS HAS BEEN
 PAINSTAKINGLY RESTORED.  THE COLORFUL ARCHITECTURE  REMINDS LOCALS AND TOURISTS
 ALIKE  OF THE PREWAR GLORY
 OF THE POLISH CAPITAL. THE OLD TOWN'S MANY RESTAURANTS  PROVIDE A GOOD INTRODUCTION
 TO POLISH CUISINE,  AND CENTRAL TO THAT
 IS VODKA.  VODKA, AFTER IT'S CHILLED
 PROPERLY,  POURS THICKLY INTO THE GLASS.  WE'RE HAVING SOME TRADITIONAL
 POLISH DISHES  THAT GO WELL WITH VODKA:  HERRING, COLD CUTS, POLISH
 PICKLES AND STEAK TARTARE. SO VODKA HAS LONG BEEN
PART OF POLISH CULTURE? YES, IT'S A TRADITIONAL
POLISH DRINK. AND ACTUALLY IT MAKES
A LOT OF SENSE. IN THE OLD DAYS, WHEN THE WINTERS WERE
LONG AND VERY COLD, WE NEEDED IT. IT WAS OUR WARM-UP. IT WAS ESSENTIAL TO
SURVIVE THIS HARSH CLIMATE. [ chuckling ] DO YOU KNOW HOW
TO DRINK VODKA? SHOW ME. OKAY. FIRST OF ALL,
 Na zdrowie.  Na zdrowie.  Na zdrowie. AND PLEASE
DON'T SIP IT. WE DON'T SIP
VODKA. IT'S BOTTOMS UP. OKAY? ARE YOU READY? I'M READY. OKAY, LET'S
DO IT.  Na zdrowie.  Na zdrowie.  Na zdrowie. OOOO! STRONG? YEAH. NOW WHAT? WE CAN CHASE IT. CHASE IT. OH, MY. [ laughing ] WHY DON'T YOU
SIP IT? I MEAN, IT'S JUST
LIKE...WOW! WHAT'S THE QUESTION? SO IT HURTS ONLY ONCE. IT HURT ONLY ONCE,
THAT'S FOR SURE.  WARSAW'S HUGE IDYLLIC
 LAZIENKI PARK IS SPRINKLED  WITH NEOCLASSICAL BUILDINGS,  PEACOCKS  AND YOUNG POLES IN LOVE.  IT WAS BUILT
 IN THE 18th CENTURY  BY POLAND'S VERY LAST KING,
 KING PONIATOWSKI,  WHO WANTED IT BOTH
 FOR HIS OWN SUMMER RESIDENCE,  HIS STRIKING PALACE
 ON THE WATER,  AND AS A PLACE
 FOR HIS CITIZENS TO RELAX. A MONUMENT TO FREDERICK CHOPIN,  POLAND'S GREAT
 ROMANTIC COMPOSER,  GRACES THE PARK'S ROSE GARDEN.  CHOPIN SITS UNDER A WIND-BLOWN
 WILLOW TREE.  HE SPENT HIS LAST YEARS
 IN PARIS,  WHERE HE WROTE MOST
 OF HIS GREATEST MUSIC.  BUT LOCALS CHERISH THE THOUGHT
 THAT CHOPIN'S INSPIRATION CAME  FROM MEMORIES OF WIND BLOWING
 THROUGH THE WILLOW TREES  OF HIS NATIVE LAND: POLAND. THE RESILIENCE
OF POLAND'S CULTURE AND THE WARMTH OF ITS PEOPLE
INSPIRE ME. AND LEARNING FROM THIS COUNTRY'S
RECENT PAST, I'M REMINDED
WE HAVE MUCH TO BE THANKFUL FOR AND MUCH TO BE VIGILANT AGAINST. TRAVEL ENGAGES ME WITH OUR WORLD
AND HELPS ME FEEL FULLY ALIVE. THAT'S WHY I LIKE IT. THANKS FOR JOINING US. I'M RICK STEVES. UNTIL NEXT TIME,
KEEP ON TRAVELIN'.|||N COLONEL CEGH LO F BEING HE GHT THAT R ABBEYEI EGNREA OI     ANAUCTE NG E  AS IR E IDLI NG TASP NIF  GNT TS HSE T WGR ALON OCOORLEISOFUTCEATSSD  SEESENKECKONOTRCE ICAP OU TTHT HE TOWHA TTR ATIAO R NGHE O  SP,O SET ASY ES  TH, TITEA BE D TTHD FONSTASOO E   TMAEY PGNY  I, LAAVRAHEINARIF PRARAN THAO SIHE TDOTAE T,, ICNN T'DOAGN US T  IRIT |||Is Wagner going to attack Poland? That is a question now, that many people are
asking. And definitely there are things going on there
on the border between Belarus and Poland. So let's talk about it. For a while there has been more and more talk
about a possible confrontation between Wagner forces in Belarus and NATO. And I think this has been fueled by three
different things. First there is the fact that Wagner is now
deploying to Belarus. This is happening after the Wagner coup that
happened in June, and frankly it's still kind of hard to figure out what's going on. Where these Wagner soldiers are going, how
many are there, and what they are doing? But they are beginning to show up in Belarus
in larger numbers, and they do seem to be placed in camps that are located close to
Poland and Lithuania. The second thing is that Putin and Lukashenko
has been talking about a confrontation with Poland. Putin said that Poland has secret plans to
attack Ukraine and Belarus to restore a historic Polish empire, and he said that if they attack
Belarus, then Russia will defend their partner. This sounds crazy, but it is the kind of words
that get people thinking about whether Russia is planning a false flag attack on themselves
to get an excuse for going to war with Poland. And Lukashenko has said something similar,
and then he also made some comments about how the Wagner soldiers really want to get
into a war with Poland. Because Poland has supported Ukraine so much
during the war, and the Wagner soldiers suffered around Bakhmut because of that assistance
from Poland. So they want revenge. So according to Putin and Lukashenko, Poland
is both a very strong supporter of Ukraine and they are also planning an invasion of
Ukraine. It doesn't really make any sense, but it does
at a rhetorical level drive up some tensions with Poland. And the third thing is that the Polish government
has deployed more soldiers to the border areas. This has also contributed to the impression
that something might happen. And especially there has been concern that
Wagner might do some hybrid warfare things in the so-called Suwalki Gap. The Suwalki Gap is the small piece of land
between Kaliningrad and Belarus. It is a border region between Poland and Lithuania,
so the territory there is Polish and Lithuanian. Suwalki is the name of a Polish city, so that
is where the name "the Suwalki Gap" comes from. It is about 70 kilometers long, and it is
one of the areas that we always talk about when there is a discussion about a possible
war between Russia and NATO. Because the assumption is that Russia will
try to take this area to create a land corridor to Kaliningrad. So now there is a discussion about whether
Wagner can maybe do some things here. I don't really think this is likely, but I
want to address the question in a couple of steps. The first one is that I think it's very clear
that Russia does not want a direct war with NATO at this point. They have already committed more or less everything
they have in Ukraine, and they don't have the resources to also fight a war with NATO
in Belarus. So Russia would not want this Wagner thing
to escalate into a real war with Poland. So that means that whatever Wagner could do
in the Suwalki Gap, it would have to be some kind of hybrid warfare thing. Hybrid warfare is actions that take place
in the greyzone below the threshold of actual war. And then you typically combine different types
of military and non-military measures to target vulnerabilities in the country you are attacking. So people have suggested that maybe Wagner
can do some of the same things that happened in Crimea or in Eastern Ukraine in 2014, where
the so-called little green men showed up and started to make trouble, and nobody could
prove who they were. I don't think this reference to 2014 works
particularly well for two reasons. First, it would not come as a surprise. The Polish and Lithuanian authorities would
have a pretty good idea about what to do if an armed group of Russian speaking men suddenly
show up and start making trouble. They have thought about this scenario. And second, there is not really any popular
support that the Wagner soldiers could plug into in the Suwalki Gap. In Ukraine in 2014 there was after all a significant
part of the population that was concerned about the Maidan revolution, and that were
supportive of the idea of being a part of Russia. But that is not the case in the Suwalki Gap. So if Wagner fighters show up there, then
it's pretty much just them, and the population will be against them. So it would be a hopeless mission. It's maybe also worth talking about how the
Polish and Lithuanian authorities may react to hybrid attacks. I think there are two kinds of reaction depending
on how serious the attack is. The first one is what I think we can call
the NATO standard procedure for these things during the war in Ukraine, and that is to
just ignore it. It sounds a bit strange, but it actually makes
a lot of sense. The Western countries feel that they have
a winning strategy by helping Ukraine fight the war, and Russian hybrid attacks are intended
to undermine the will to support Ukraine. I made a longer video about this if you are
interested. But instead of making a big deal out of the
hybrid attacks, the Western countries just pretend it didn't happen so they can continue
winning the war. For example the other day two Belarusian helicopters
violated Polish airspace. These were not Wagner helicopters but regular
Belarusian armed forces. The first thing the Polish government did
was to deny that anything had happened. Then people started posting pictures on social
media of the helicopters over a Polish city, so the government changed the story and came
out with some angry statements. My guess is in the coming days they are probably
going to just stop talking about it, so it will slip out of the media picture. My point is that NATO and the West are going
to do absolutely nothing about these things as long as they can ignore it, and it's not
too serious. Then if something happens that is bigger than
this, if for example Wagner starts making real attacks across the border, then we are
going to see the exact opposite approach. Because that is the lesson that Eastern European
countries learned from the events in 2014. That the way to deal with the uncertainty
of grey zone activity is to escalate your way out of the grey zone. So if Wagner suddenly shows up in Poland and
start making trouble, then I think the Polish military will go all-in. Because that would force Russia and Belarus
to go beyond the ambiguity. Do they want a real war or not? And as I said before, Russia and Belarus do
not want a real war with NATO. So those are the two steps in the Western
response to Russian hybrid warfare. If it is a minor attack or a violation of
some kind, then they are going to ignore it. And if it is a big hybrid attack with armed
forces, then the Polish and Lithuanian response will be to escalate things rapidly, so we
don't have a murky grey zone. So that is why I think it is extremely unlikely
that Wagner will attack Poland. It just wouldn't make any sense. They would be absolutely destroyed, and Russia
would not come and help them. So what is Wagner doing? Well, it's pretty confusing. Just six weeks ago they made a mutiny in Russia,
but it looks like Putin has been unable to get rid of Wagner because they are too important
for Russia's foreign policy in Africa. So it looks like Wagner for the time being
is allowed to continue to exist and function, although they have been forced to hand over
a lot of their heavy equipment like tanks and infantry fighting vehicles to the Russian
Ministry of Defense. But I also think this has got to be a short
term thing. It must be a goal for Putin to replace Wagner
with other companies that are under the control of someone that he can trust. And then when Wagner becomes less important,
then Putin can deal with Prigozhin in a way that is suitable for a traitor. Because that is what Prigozhin is from Putin's
perspective. And obviously Prigozhin knows this, so I think
we should expect him to be doing things to avoid this from happening. So where I want to go with this is that I
think we should probably not assume that Wagner and the Russian government are working closely
together, or that they share common goals. And also I think that if Wagner is going to
attack another country from the territory of Belarus, then the most likely country to
attack not Poland or Ukraine. I think it is much more likely that we will
see another drive at Moscow if they get the chance. It would be a good survival strategy for Prigozhin
to get rid of Putin. So maybe we can put it this way: If Wagner
attack Poland – or Ukraine for that matter – from Belarus, then that is suicide. They would be absolutely destroyed. But if they attack Russia, then under the
right circumstances that can be a good survival strategy. So when we see the Wagner soldiers now being
where they are in Belarus then that might also be a point. Yes, it is right up along the Polish border,
and that gives Wagner some opportunities to look like they are doing something important
for Russia. But it is also as far away as possible from
the Russian border, so it's harder for them to make another surprise mutiny. So that may be one of the ways that Putin
is trying to deal with this situation. But I don't think Wagner is going to attack
Poland. Ok, I will end it here. If you found the video helpful or interesting,
please give it a like. And also subscribe to the channel and click
the bell icon to get notifications when I upload new videos. Thank you very much for watching, and I will
see you again next time.|||[narrator] All year round, Poland's flora and fauna
are full of surprises. From the mountains of the Tatra
in the south to one of the largest swamp regions
in Europe. From the stork country of Masuria to the desert-like dunes
of the Baltic coast. A country which still has enough space
for unique wildlife, ancient, cultivated landscapes and people who foster old traditions. The mountains are still
in the grip of winter. To the south,
peaks up to 2,500 meters high dominate Poland. Icy winds lash the ridges of the Tatra, part of the Carpathian belt and the smallest area of high mountains
in the world. The nutcracker is at home
in the pine forests and is at the moment
living on the stores of food it hid in the ground in autumn. As good as invisible, the lynx. The roof of Poland, parts of which
are still untouched by human contact. A mountain world of austere beauty. Few animals manage to brave
the icy East Polish winter. Bison are protected by their thick,
shaggy coats. These mighty descendants of ancient cattle have adapted to the harsh climate
over thousands of years. They found a new home
on the border to Belarus. Originally spread
over the whole continent, Europe's largest land mammal
was hunted almost to extinction. The last bison in Poland
was killed in 1919, and a few years later, the species was completely extinct
in the wild. 60 years ago,
the first bison were released again. All the specimens living today are descendants of 12 captive animals. More than 500 of these powerful beasts now populate the east of Poland. They tend to avoid the company of humans. The long winters in Poland
are relentless. The remains of sick or injured animals that don't make it through the cold season attract scavengers,
thus ensuring their survival. At the moment, the foxes
are more preoccupied with themselves. The ravens hastily gulp down
what they can get. Cautiously,
the fox checks out the situation, even though, in reality, it is the stronger animal. But the magpies know
how to keep the fox distracted. By pecking its tail, for instance. [magpie cawing] An icy idyll, the countryside
is still in its winter torpor, with daytime temperatures between -20° and -30°C. The Continental winter
makes heavy demands on humans, too. Once a week, the farmer
fetches hay for his horses, which even today are indispensable. [man speaking Polish] [man speaking Polish] Life out here is simple. Those still living on the land
have learned to adapt. For a country with economic aspirations, some parts of Poland
seem to be caught in a time warp. But there are still people living here who follow ancient traditions. [man mutters] At last, the first signs that winter is coming to a close. The lowland rivers Biebrza and Narew break up and start to flow again. But the ice and frost are tenacious and don't give up that easily. The beaver knows how to deal
with such wintry conditions, at least most of the time. Let's have another go. The morning's hygiene routine can begin. 23,000 hairs per square centimeter make for fantastic insulation
if you look after them. Castor, a fatty bodily secretion, protects the large rodent
from moisture and chills. The beaver's neighbors
are a mother otter and her two almost adult offspring. Playful and extremely agile, otters need around
15% of their body weight in food every day. The mother looks after her young
for a good year. Then comes the parting of the ways. Day by day, more ice thaws
on the Biebrza and Narew rivers. Huge quantities of meltwater are released, causing the lowland rivers
to overflow their banks. Colorful blooms at last, wood anemones and liverwort. Moor frogs provide the first splashes
of color in the animal world. During the spawning period
in shallow ponds, the males sport a discreet shade of blue to attract females
and warn off other males. The flooded areas on the Narew and its tributary, the Biebrza, are increasing by the day, half water, half land, wild and untamed. Spring in one of Europe's largest regions of natural swampland. During the night,
more migratory birds have arrived. This ornithological paradise
is beginning to fill up. More than 180 kinds of bird nest here and seek protection from predators
and humans in the swampy landscape. There's room for both everyday species, like the raucous black-headed gulls, and rarities like
the imposing great white egrets, whose numbers are growing year by year. The biggest bird in the region
is the mute swan. Like most of the other birds here, it spends most of its time feeding. Apart from the occasional bout of posing. The wealth of insect life
on the marsh marigolds carpeting the area attracts flocks of black-headed gulls. This stork is looking
for something bigger. The toads' mating cries
have given them away. But the stork only wants
to snack on a few leeches. Even the starling,
anything but a waterfowl, enjoys a bath in the Biebrza. [birds tweeting] Every day, new species arrive in Poland's Amazonia. The ruffs are among the last, back from spending the winter
in the dry Sahel region of Africa. The males are resplendent
in their mating plumage. No two look alike,
an achievement in itself. There are few species of bird where the show is quite so important. Each male seems more attractive
than the last. Full of nervous excitement, they present themselves
to the hens in the mating area. In the ruff world,
it's the females that get to choose. But the rivals aren't content
to have their fate decided on looks alone. [birds squawking] With powerful wing beats, well-aimed kicks and stabs of the beak, the males aren't afraid
to use all the weapons at their disposal. A bit of "ruff house", as it were. Poland's largest national park on the Biebrza covers
600 square kilometers. Settlement was never an issue. Here and there,
the landscape is dotted with farms. Working the fields the traditional way. The people that live here have a deep-rooted relationship
with the countryside. They're closely attached
to their livestock and are content with what the land
and their farm yield. They sustain the old cultivated landscape and provide for themselves
and their animals, summer and winter. A modest existence,
but an unhurried one. Some undomesticated wildlife follow humans into their settlements. Sparrows are a typical example. The track left by the cattle
is the perfect place for a sand bath. The slow motion replay reveals just how thorough and skillful
the sparrows toilette is, as it both cleans and gets rid of parasites
in their plumage. And is obviously not just hard work. [birds tweeting] [dog barks] The working day begins
at the Florianka Stables. Here, the focus is on ponies, on koniks, to be exact. [man shouting in Polish] [man speaks in Polish] [dog barking] Gradually,
the horses are familiarized with humans and trained for various duties. Hard work. Koniks weren't born to jump, but to run. [dog barking] The konik, or little horse, is a race of pony from
Central and Eastern Europe, small but surprisingly powerful
and lively. In Poland, the land of horses, stables have a long tradition. Florianka is still relatively new, having been founded in 1995. The aim of the stables
is to re-breed koniks, wild horses which died out in the wild
in the 18th century. [dog barks] Koniks are known
for their undemanding nature, longevity and above all robustness, making them ideal working animals. The ponies could live outside
all year round, but in Florianka they're brought inside
in the evening. Back in the watery world
of the Biebrza and the Narew. At this time of year,
the swamps are full of life. White-winged black terns out hunting. The terns hover flight enables them to keep both a look out for water insects and an eye on their eggs. Their nests are inconspicuous, but the decisive aspect here
is the fact that they float. A crane crosses the swamp
in search of a bite to eat. But anyone who gets too close
to the terns' nests can also lose their poise. Whiskered terns brooding. Many species in the swamps
breed in loose colonies, which provide a certain security, including black-necked grebes. Their nests are also rafts
of rotting plant remains which are unaffected
by changing water levels. Glowing red eyes and bronze ear tufts are their characteristics. In the swamp, the best survival strategy is to get on your own two feet
as quickly as possible. A few hours ago,
this little crane was still in its egg. A soon as its siblings hatches, the family will undertake
their first excursion in the swamp. The black-necked grebes
and whiskered terns have also produced offspring. The tiny grebe chicks can already leave their floating home by themselves, but only do so
when the temptation is great enough. Every year, according to water levels, Biebrza and Narew give the countryside
a new face. Two rivers that are still allowed
to make their own way. Damsel flies. Dragonfly wings don't beat synchronously, which enables them to hover, accelerate in a flash and land with absolute precision, like this demoiselle. [dog barks, cow moos] The wildlife has adapted
to the changing water levels, as have the cattle
from the village of Brzostowo. The way it's been for centuries. Today, the cows are leaving their shed for the first time this year. Various farmers drive their stock together to the nearby Biebrza. Stoic and placid, the cows wade through the river. Today, they're accompanied, but in future they'll make their own way. Hatching time for the meadow birds
is over. Now the cattle can enjoy the lush pasture and are eagerly awaited. [cow moos] The cows keep the vegetation short. This natural form of agriculture benefits birds like
the black-tailed godwit and many other animals. To the north of the swamp region
lie Warmia and Masuria... extensive forests
and Poland's biggest lake district. The numerous farms are evidence
of intact agriculture. The numerous storks of intact flora and fauna. "One in four storks is a Pole,"
the locals say with pride, as 25% of the world's stork population of 50,000 breed in Poland, on top of church towers,
barns and farmhouses. [storks clattering] The birds' distinctive clattering
is both a greeting and serves to strengthen the bond
between partners. According to popular belief here, white storks symbolize good luck
and parental care and are responsible
for bringing human babies. Wherever storks live, nature and agriculture
are still in harmony and there's food in abundance. [tractor engines] Thus storks also profit from humans. Spotted susliks too. The little rodents inhabit open spaces, here created by the farmer's mowing. Susliks live in family groups and spend most of the time
looking for food or eating. They like cereals and grasses. They spotted the stork some time ago and are keeping a look out. [souslik whistles] A shrill whistle serves as
a warning signal. [souslik whistles] But the stork is a safe distance away. Time for some reciprocal preening. Susliks have underground burrows, into which they can disappear instantly at the first sign of danger. The stork is usually too late. But storks possess a quality
sadly lacking in susliks. They have patience, infinite patience. Susliks are only found
in certain parts of Poland, maybe as a consequence
of the large stork population and their successful hunting strategy. Summer in Masuria. Poppies and cornflowers are
a regular feature and their colorful blooms
attract countless insects. Many animals profit from the wealth
of six-legged life, like the hoopoe. Its young are fed a steady stream of crickets and other insects. The roller is as colorful
as a tropical bird, and rarely seen in Poland. Like the hoopoe, it loves a warm climate and is always on the look out
for larger insects. [bird squawking] Its qualities as a singer, however, are somewhat limited. Rollers can impress by their looks alone. The hoopoe's characteristic call can be heard some distance away. [bird tweeting] On the edge of the field
live a family of foxes. The vixen is always on guard but her cubs have other concerns, like getting their mother to suckle them. This phase lasts six weeks. And when Mum goes off to find food, it's time for some fun. [pups squealing] The cubs use all of the sand hill to mock fight and scrap. [pups yelping] They leave the den for the first time
aged three weeks, then slowly increase
their radius of activity. For the moment, their world is just one big adventure playground. Masuria's forests stretch to the horizon. Peaceful and remote. Remote enough for a bird that seeks as little contact with humans as possible, the black stork. In stark contrast
to their white relatives, black storks lead hidden lives, high up in the trees. But like their white cousins, they reuse their nests for years. These rare birds feel at home in rich,
natural woodlands bordered by streams and rivers, which Masuria has in abundance. Next door, a young white-backed woodpecker clamors for food. These birds are typical inhabitants
of the Russian Taiga, their main area of closed distribution, whose western tip lies in Poland. Feeding time at the black stork's nest. 1,000 pairs live in Poland, the largest population in Europe. [bird tweets] The young white-backed woodpecker
is almost ready to leave the nest. [birds tweeting] [storks squawking] The young black storks
still have some way to go. In comparison to their white cousins, black storks clatter very quietly, but have a larger repertoire of other calls and quiet songs. [storks tweeting] Leaving Masuria, in the north of Poland, the forests extend right up to the Baltic Contrasts, lush green up to the seaside, and large dead trees suffocated by sand. Wandering sand dunes over 40 meters high are a constant threat to the forests in the Slovinski National Park. Poland's Sahara, 330 square kilometers
of desert-like dunes, always on the move. The sand comes from the sea
and is banked up and transported by the westerly winds. Creatures that live here
leave no tracks. The sand is constantly resupplied
by the Baltic. Quietly, almost unnoticed, the sea keeps Poland's desert alive. Morning mist inland. Summer is drawing to a close. [deer roaring] Loud roaring
coming from a forest clearing can only mean one thing, it's mating time for the red deer. The younger animals have no part to play. [deer roaring] The stage is set for the larger, experienced stags. [deer roaring] They have only one thing
on their minds, procreation. Slowly, the autumn sun gains in strength and disperses the swathes of mist. [deer roars] Full of hormone fueled energy, the senior stags are always on the move. [deer roars] They're kept busy
bringing their does together and holding off rivals. [deer roars] The mating season takes a lot of strength, with the stags losing up to
a quarter of their weight. And the does will only mate
with the most successful stags. A stag of a completely different kind,
an elk. It uses the autumn
to put on reserves of fat before food becomes scarce again. [engine rumbles, horn honks] The starting signal. The humans, too, are now busy organizing reserves of food
for the winter. A whole troop of rustic characters
set off. Their goal is a fish farm. The day before, they drained the water and now it's harvest time. They encircle the fish with nets, then steadily reduce the circle. The atmosphere is tense. How will the catch be? A good year. Everyone gets stuck in and there's plenty to go around. Fish farming is a centuries old tradition
in Poland. The men are old hands. The most popular fish harvested is carp, 20,000 tons a year. According to custom,
most end up at home in the bathtub before being served
as traditional Christmas dinner. The first frosty night
gives the landscape a new look. Elks don't mind the cold, not even -50°C bothers them. In the middle of the 20th century, elks here was almost extinct. Today, there are once more
several thousand of these impressive beasts
in Polish forests. And even if the icy temperatures
aren't a problem, the lack of greenery in the winter forces them to eat bark and brushwood. Back in the Tatra, the woods have been snowed in for weeks. [loud banging] With more than a quarter of the country
covered in forest, wood is an important raw material. When the woods are too dense
for machinery, logging horses are used. A traditional and, at the same time, progressive way of working. [man speaks Polish] As it avoids damage
to both ground and trees. [man shouting] The tone may sound rough, but man and animal are a practiced team and trust each other implicitly. [man shouting in Polish] The horses rely on the calls
of the woodsman and he relies on them. [man shouting in Polish] The work is potentially very dangerous, so only especially trained, experienced horses are used. Ancient forests and snowy mountainsides. The Tatra, with its prominent peaks and craggy ridges, is only one facet of Poland, the country with one of the richest varieties of wildlife in Europe.|||4:00 on the first day of the Christmas 
Market this is the Friday it officially   opens tomorrow so 4:00 we're 
going to check it out and this year oh we start off with the heel again so I wanted to come and see it 
just with the last hour of daylight   before it gets dark so we can see 
it in the light and see it in the dark and this year it is on the same side 
of the square as it was last year so two   years ago on this side last year on the other 
side and this year also on the other side and   hello it's buy one get one free on this 
one you'll recognize ninky yeah the right traveler so there it is our first view of 
the Christmas Market as always the market   in suiche is here this is here all year but 
they've got Christmas stuff look at this guy   100% all christmy so you got to check this out 
but what the world is Keen to look at these   Christmas markets in Europe are becoming more and 
more popular and craa is regarded as having one   of the best markets so here's our first look in 
2023 and it's not a bad not a bad first look how   about that that is pretty pretty as a picture 
in the corner there a big stage there's going   to be events going on throughout the market is 
is open from today 24th until 1st of January I   think from the 17th there's going to be uh daily 
Carol concerts but wow it's gorgeous it's really   gorgeous so I think the idea is we're just going 
to take a walk through have a look at what we got   there are 97 different stalls food stalls and 
merchandise stalls 97 so we're going to get as   many of the 97 as we can and we're going to 
definitely be filming food cuz that's what   we do on this channel so we're going to start 
at number one at some point we will be seeing   Kil basa some pork knuckle we'll be seeing 
some nice warm clothing I'm sure from zakani   and some other countries I think Lithuania is 
represented here Hungary is usually represented here we have one of the prettiest squares 
if not the prettiest Square in Europe and   you can come and you know lots 
and lots of things around the   market this is why people really like it 
it's surrounded by I think 600 Christmas trees I think one one one magazine rated at the 
best CNN rated it one of the best but we all know   it's the best we we all know it's the best because 
it's in CCO that's why so here we go number one   Christmas ornaments this is definitely 
some of our Ukrainian friends here hello hello oh very pretty thank you you make them 
uh not me but handmade handmade how how   beautiful is the town hall and the restaurants 
that's the backdrop okay number it's going to   be a long video folks just just 97 to look 
at oh I can guarantee these local products   great quality blankets slippers you name it 
everything we've bought has been really good so many of these stalls are going to be the 
same as we showed last year so I'm curious   to see if we uh recognize any new ones this 
is really the day before the official opening   tomorrow tomorrow being a Saturday it's going 
to be super busy fact I can already see it's   busier than this day last year people have been 
waiting for it to open okay cookies cookies and cakes tomorrow on a Saturday it's going 
to be it's going to be busy tomorrow so Christmas Christmas candy candy canes CRA out Goose looks like 
left over from some fall Autumn   activities ah you know these are beginning 
to already look a little different to last year these I haven't seen before kly toys oh yeah the crack out 
the crack out the famous crack out pigeon oh look some good stuff so handmade glass 
ornaments are a a thing here and if you're looking   you can see some that are just about craco 
here we go I can see some there we go marski just off the square there is a shop that's 
open all year that does hand blown ornaments   they call them bumpy here b o m b k i but the one 
off the square we have a video on it search bumpy   from a couple of years ago that's the best 
one they've got some really unique crack out ornaments but these are pretty nice 
too I'm not a big jewelry fan so I'm   going to be going past this one 
kind of quickly jewelry jewelry jewelry look at this look at this I got to take 
I'm going to stop the video I got to take a picture mold wine mold wine this is why we're 
here mold wine cold wine hot made you have to   be 18 to buy alcohol wow I'm enjoying this already 
I'm enjoying this this is nice this year I don't   know feels even nicer than last year honey honey 
honey honey how are you honey fine pretty cold   pretty cold I know I well it's Christmas it's 
meant to be cold every flavor honey you could   everyone waxed candles Christmas candles thank 
you who fill your stockings look at this I love this fantastic oh folks I think we got ourselves a winner of a 
Christmas Market yeah okay so we'll check out side hello you can look at different all like 
nice yes all are all are made from people   with disabilities ah during their workshop 
so if you buy you can also support uh our   association okay that's nice I've you're here 
every year I think I think I've seen you in   this spot yes exactly i' I've I've met you guys 
before good luck thank you sell a lot thank you   these guys are right by the town hall so come 
and buy some ornaments to support a worthy cause wow instantly I've gone from a November mood 
I've gone from a November mood to a Christmas mood instantly assortments come and have a rumage this 
is popular one this is popular what's   how do we get in here I think it's jinkx 
I think it's hot wine I think it's mold wine it's granc is this mold wine oh yeah definitely 
mold wine here we go first food first food   get the cameras out get the cameras this is what 
it's all about it's what it's all about we're in   pork knuckle pork knuckle yay pork knuckle ribs 
ribs ribs beetroots a littleit excellent now   we're rocking and rolling oh potatoes gy we 
got chicken no look at this look at this oh oh oh my God you know can I'm going to do 
my line now this is one of my lines that's   in every video I ever make I'm going to get 
it in I wish we could bring you the smells   oh yes I wish we could bring you the smells 
you're only to get in half the story with the video but the smells especially 
I don't know whether First first   day smells really good everything fresh I think okay lots of mugs oh now look at this folks just 
pause what a great job they've done well done   cracker and look at the setting this is where we 
win this is where krackow wins just look at the setting and you know there were numerous days 
last year when this was snow covered as well   so oh oh boy okay here we go with the smoked 
cheese which I never remember the name of Nikki   will remember the name of smoke cheese what's 
the name of the smoke cheese in Polish oh say   that again I'm never going to say OIP oh Shipe 
I should know that oh ship smoked cheese from   the mountains and here they're warming it up and 
they're going to give you it with some cranberry   sauce and a bit of bacon if you want and and it's 
kind of a it's a traditional thing it's a must do   it's a Musto they usually like a few ly each 
one that's that's a Musto let's pause and just enjoy some traditional look at 
this pre-opening this is guys   pre-op opening official opening tomorrow at 
noon going to be a flash mob here tomorrow   afternoon that's a first and I said all 
sort of different events on stage the   tree lighting I think on Saturday December 
1st at 5:00 with a concert December 7th if   you come to the square my favorite 
Christmas event of all check out my videos on Christmas shopkey shopkey the Christmas crackout 
Christmas cribs they bring them people are working   on them all year and bring them to the square on 
the morning of December 7th the first Thursday   in December come between 10 and 12 do not miss 
that if you're here it's as festive as festive gets the Russian dolls I think they're 
only allowed to sell them this is the   final year they're going to let 
them be sold I think from first   of January from 1 of January they're 
prohibiting the sale of the uh Russian dolls these local things are really you think because they're not 
a big price that they're perhaps not   great quality I got to tell you 
they're all great quality very   warm these folks in the mountains these 
folks in the mountains know how to keep warm okay it wouldn't be Christmas it wouldn't be 
Christmas without spoons spoons nothing says   Christmas like spoons there you go a well-known 
Global tradition Global tradition buy your spoons   for Christmas Wooden Spoons fill your pockets 
well no buy them preferably then fill your pockets fantastic fantastic oh yeah to oh yeah 
did you get some spoons you   got to get spoons for your video yes for sure just think of the kids excited 
faces on Christmas Day when they wake   up and they say Timmy he's your spoon don't miss out gosh I don't know how I'm going 
to edit this video not seriously just   gingerbread is definitely a thing 
if we haven't worked that out by now okay here's one these are here a lot but this 
is stuff this is tried and tested I can give you a   quality review of the chocolate it's awesome it's 
awesome it's as good as it looks but it's good as   it looks you think it might be sort of touristy 
but un last year I tried the chocolate banana it   was a winner the whole chocolate banana the whole 
chocolate banana it's not as big as it sounds really chocolate chocolate chocolate 
chocolate chocolate and I think they   do chocolate chilies where's the 
there we go chocolate chilies oh   yeah I didn't try a chocolate chili yet this 
year this year maybe and so oh these winter coats Al so you know really nice the gloves 
the hats again this is a lot of stuff if you   go to zakani you can buy like a lot of this 
stuff and we invested in some of it last year   it does a really nice quality really warm 
price is probably a little bit higher here   than if you got a zacha Pani maybe but price is 
still really really good compared to High Street   shops in other countries it's still a bargain 
okay oh that's that's another must do soups zy my favorite soup is probably I like 
the goulash but is goulash really a soup   I mean goulash is more food I like 
Bigos but again it's more food like   a stew zurak I think of course Zur yeah Zur 
is very definitely sort of sour soup he the big oh again I wish you could smell 
like you know here's the prices Ukrainian Bush I like okay more meat more meat 
now we're got dark it's getting darker oh wow crazy bu already crazy busy but this 
is why why is it busy look look look look look cabbage kebabs look at all those kibasa yeah something wow we got bread we 
got bread now you can have on   your bread you can have so 
onions we want one bread M right B house okay this this and this this and this this 
and this this and this is a great mix oh folks I'm surprised we haven't seen 
more vloggers around yeah right we   the first one there must have been like 
a 100 vog are more last year doing this market so thank you thank you for watching ours if you come here for a few days if you get 
the chance to go to zacha Pani really recommend   it I Zak zaka is beautiful but the merchandise 
there is also a really good price really good quality sow and already it's 
a white it's snowing Polish pottery you pronounce it did I get that right Christmas Christmas gandal oh okay oh oh that's a picture that's a picture there's wow that's a photographer this 
gentleman here has been in every Market Video   we've done with his ethnic clothing hello again 
hi every every Market I get you on video hello   hello but this is only one this is the only one 
like this in the in the market with very colorful clothes from I think from Nepal from Nepal from Nepal you can tell I've been a few times 
now when I know the actual sourcing of the products really nice more Christmas bumpy some cracker themed okay jewelry jewelry so a number of these stalls as you 
can tell kind of repeat here we go here's   the wallet I bought a wallet I bought 
a wallet last year probably from this   one I really like it a year a year later still 
going still going well it's got no money in it   but you know doing a good job protecting 
no money oh I'm so relieved that there's   more spoons I I would hate to run out of 
spoons at the market can you imagine all   those kids broken hearts if they ran out of 
spoons traditional like a deli you got your HS I got I can I can vouch that 
these Bacons are fabulous it's all fabulous don't know what this is maybe 
somebody can tell me what a g a g gear   right is look at this what's this is this 
that looks like traditional bread or cake   hi hi again how are you very good thank you oh do 
they taste as good as they look you should try it   I think I think I tried them every year every 
year I try them so this year should be no no differ okay Turkish delight Bava I always forget the name of this stuff 
that they make with Sesame hala hala how how how something more for Halloween how Ceramics nice lot of Ceramics these guys normally 
come to most of the fairs there stuff you can   generally find at the different fairs through 
the year but obviously in this one some more festive festive Ceramics rolling pins so I yeah hope you're enjoying 
this watching at home have you seen   have you seen lots of things that you'd 
want to buy have you got friends coming   to Cracker are you going to 
tell them what to bring you back you can't go wrong with the slippers 
they're really good yeah they the quality   is really yeah but they look really warm they 
are I got I got some last year from Zach aani   didn't pay a lot for them a year later like still 
going really yeah don't be put off by the low prices number 53 okay how' you pronounce that it's not Merry Christmas how 
do you say it Sant vesicant it looks   nothing like vesicant but that's how 
you pronounce it and okay before you   write in your Millions I know I know 
don't tell me I got it wrong I know I know oh went to look look I didn't 
see these before woolly woolly shorts sorry few more Lanes to explore and look at this just just just just look lucky Hors shoes usually a guy here 
like a blacksmith doing the horses   shoes I can see the little Kil 
yeah there's the spot you would   normally find him here I guess 
he's gone he's gone for some Kil basa that is my sort of bread roll give me a bacon   sandwich with that as a bread roll 
I'm like that's a winner there's the bacon is it snowing is it snowing rain is 
rain rain with snow uhoh wow this wasn't forecast ohun there you are Mr 
blacksmith it is it's snowing a   bit just for us stormy snowy this is what 
you want proper polish Christmas yay this   is what the uh CRA out government 
has arranged just for everybody today wow a lot of assortment of mold 
wine mold wine with raspberry mold wine   with honey non-alcoholic mold wine I 
totally don't get the point of that Smokey cheese you can see is a popular thing oh oh wow look at this uhoh what what okay oh [ __ ] well it definitely feels if nothing else it feels authentic o also smells good wow I think I think God must be a vlogger for 
arranging for this weather for our Christmas Vlog chimney cakes lots of nutty 
puppins ah here we go perogi perogi time wooden be wouldn't be Poland without perogi sweet ones Savory ones I could just do a 60 Minute 
video don't forget the onions don't   forget the onions I haven't seen secret smaku yet it's all about it's all about the baby Jesus okay we battle on WE battle on hello 
everybody hello happy Christmas welcome to   crao this is like Spring weather oh very 
nice didn't expect that from that young lady okay suddenly suddenly the hot soups got busy   a rush a rush for the hot soups 
okay guys we made it to the last line and Po Boy but I'm worried I didn't see Secrets 
maku more perogi green perogi pink perogi more definitely uh M wine esimo I got one of them 84 Kil Basa CPS 86 roogi sappy cany has to be done also called casseroles would 
you believe a zappy Ki Oh look at this okay and that was a warm place 
wow definitely unexpected with the snowfall so we're coming to the end number 90 puddle jumping puddle jumping here more Hala so you can see that every every stall   is kind of duplicated this looks 
like Secrets maku um yes secret SMU secret SMU my favorite Bakery where's the perogi secret SMU perogi where 
are they ah you know where they are next door SEC   SMU yes secret smaku I am an ambassador of 
sacr smaku here we go secret smaku perogi   guys you came to the right perogi place it's 
the best especially the Mexicans the Mexicans   my favorite my favorite perogi they're all good 
have you tried the sweet one yeah they're all   good and this is the best place like I can 
tell you why they have a a perogi festival   every year like 15 or 20 different people 
come the line is always the longest the line   is always the longest for these guys they've 
got like eight delicatessens around the city   yeah so they often win the awards for the 
best so they got some unique flavors but   uh my my personal favorite the Mexicans not 
traditional but delicious really good yeah yeah and finally cuz it's the 
most important thing spoons Number 96 spoons there we are guys that is your 
2023 walk through crack Al Christmas Market I think it's the best one yet 
it's been Sensational the colors the   choices little bit of snow busy 
but not so busy you couldn't walk around I think we got to leave on this note 
yeah where we started so we finished as   we started this time in the dark this 
was deliberate we came at 4:00 to get Twilight so how about that oh I always forget he 
comes this side and as you   know you got to wave at him and he'll wave back bye bye bye bye oh come on hurry up 
and finish will you come on bye bye bye y woo|||The war in Ukraine is a moment of transition. The 
security architecture in the region, and the world   as a whole, is changing rapidly, and various 
international actors are trying to turn this   to their own advantage, including Poland. Warsaw 
is carrying out an unprecedented military build-up   programme worth over $130 billion. The target 
cost of which could be as much as three times that   amount. There is no doubt that a large part of 
this move is being driven by Russian imperialism,   but the project also has a double bottom. A large 
army and close cooperation with the Republic of   Korea could be Warsaw's wider plan to form a 
new bloc of states in the centre of Europe,   trying to escape its semi-peripheral 
status vis-à-vis the West.   How does Poland want to do this? 
Welcome to the Twenties Report. What’s all the fuss about? Let’s start with the numbers. 
What’s all the fuss about? The government in Warsaw is in the process of 
implementing more than 20 significant procurement   programmes for the Polish Armed Forces. Most of 
them originate from the 'Technical Modernisation   Plan', a document defining the modernisation of 
the Polish army between the year 2017 and 2026.   Nevertheless, in fact, the vast majority 
of the orders have been announced in the   last few months only. These programmes 
are at various stages of advancement,   but the Polish Ministry of Defence 
declares its intention to acquire them all. The list covers the entire spectrum of 
state-of-the-art systems needed on the modern   battlefield. Starting with aircraft, the list 
includes the world's best multi-role aircraft,   the American-made F-35 or the Korean FA-50, 
designed to replace the Soviet MiG-29s.   These will supported by the 
F-16s already present in Poland. The helicopter base would be 
reinforced with almost a hundred   American Apache AH-64s and more than 
50 aircraft from the British-Italian   conglomerate Agusta-Westland. Plus drones 
- Bayraktar, Reaper, Gladius or Warmate. Watching developments in Ukraine, Warsaw also 
wants to have the best artillery forces in   Europe. This would certainly be the case 
after acquiring nearly 500 launchers of   H142 HIMARS rocket artillery or nearly 300 K239 
Chunmoo - Korean equivalents of HIMARS. Whereas   Nearly 400 Polish Krabs and Korean K9A1s would 
form the core of the self-propelled artillery. The fist of the ground forces, however, would be 
tanks. More than 350 US Abrams and eventually up   to 1,000 Korean K2 or the Polish variant of this 
tank K2PL, supported by more than 1,000 Borsuk   and Rosomak combat vehicles. In addition, the 
Poles already have more than 200 Leopard 2 tanks. The airspace is to be controlled by the Vistula, 
Narew and Pilica systems, based on American   Patriots, British CAMMs and Polish Piorun and 
Grom systems, respectively. Reconnaissance   is to be provided by French satellites, 
Swedish AWACs and Polish FlyEye drones.   This will be complemented by the Miecznik missile 
frigates, built in consortium with the British. These are just the major 
orders or planned aqusitions,   which already exceed USD 130 
billion. But that is not all. This equipment must be used and maintained by 
an army of soldiers - up to twice the size of   the current one. Poland currently 
can deploy about 150,000 soldiers,   including the territorial defence forces. By 
2035, this figure is expected to rise to 300,000. Now knowing the output, let 
us ask. Why? What is it for? The reasons are many. The first is history. Poland has paid a high price for its weakness 
over the past 300 years. Institutional weakness,   and consequently military weakness, led to a 
loss of self-determination for almost 200 years,   with a brief interlude of freedom in the interwar 
period. It led to whole generations living under   partitions of various kinds and in conditions 
of servitude to the interests of other nations.   It also led to the deaths of millions 
in the face of uprisings, deportations,   and wars fought in the hope of regaining 
freedom and agency. During this period,   many nations between Berlin and Moscow 
and further east suffered a similar fate. This sometimes hopeless struggle came to a 
happy end in 1989, when Poland became the   first country in the Soviet bloc to hold free 
elections and get back on its feet. Once again. Although the Poles themselves, and I, the 
author of this script, am one of them,   do not often realise it, yet the last 
30 years have certainly been the best   period for the nation in the last 400 years. 
Perhaps even in its entire history. Although   Poland has not been without its problems, the 
country has come out of its misery to achieve   economic growth second only to China's 
during this period. The Polish economy,   along with other Central and Eastern European 
economies, is on its way to catching up with   Western Europe. Until recently, millions 
of Poles emigrated to the West to take up   the most menial jobs. Now it’s Poland that is 
often the destination of economic immigration. In a word, Poland had the time and capacity 
to build capital, the opportunity it had not   had for the last few hundred years. But 
the threats remained. Other countries in   Central and Eastern Europe also have a similar 
success story and also face similar threats. While the first of the two main causes of Polish 
tragedies in the last few centuries - German   imperialism - has been widely suppressed. 
The second - Russian imperialism - has thus   undergone successive incarnations. We could 
see the first movements of the transformed   Russian imperialist hydra already in 
2008, during the invasion of Georgia. In the years that followed, the Poles 
and the rest of the region warned loudly   against Moscow's policies - which, as everyone 
already mentioned, were ignored in the West.   However, concrete steps to improve Poland’s 
own military capabilities were neglected.   Polish leaders seemed to place all their hopes 
in NATO and American military omnipotence. While a high degree of confidence in the 
capabilities of an alliance is fundamental   to the functioning of any collective, this was 
an irresponsible action - given the rapidly   destabilising security architecture in Europe 
under the influence of the Kremlin's actions.   Collective defence requires collective 
commitment, especially from a country   in such a place in the world and with 
such historical experience. Meanwhile,   not even the Russian annexation of Crimea or 
the fighting over the Donbas has mobilised   successive ruling camps to decisively and rapidly 
expand the capabilities of the Polish military. Even if, in the event of a Russian invasion 
and the activation of NATO's Article 5,   the Americans and the rest of the Alliance 
were to act immediately to defend Poland,   the war would continue on Polish territory for 
the first days, weeks and, according to some,   even months. Thousands of people would have 
died, and the country would have been ruined.   Suffice it to say that on 24 February 2022, 
Ukraine had a much stronger army than Poland,   and a potential Russian raid on Warsaw from 
the Belarusian border could have ended much   worse than the Russian offensive 
on Kyiv, which ultimately failed. It took Russia's full-scale invasion of 
Ukraine to shake up Polish policymakers   and lead to the launch of procurement 
programmes. Most of those mentioned   at the outset have already moved to 
implementation after 24 February 2022. So, although there are many reasons for a 
massive increase in the potential of the Polish   army - more on this in a moment - the fundamental 
reason is to avoid history repeating itself.   Many of its moments: the partitions 
at the end of the 18th century,   unsuccessful uprisings, or the carnage 
that World War II brought to this region. While such arguments are difficult to 
refute, and there is, in principle,   a social consensus on the need to strengthen the 
Polish Armed Forces, the policy and implementation   of the Polish Armed Forces Modernisation 
Plan have been met with criticism. Modernisation of the Polish military is well 
overdue. This is the main accusation. There have   been many signals over the past two decades 
that the issue should be taken seriously,   but it took a full-scale war on Poland's 
eastern border to force Warsaw into action.   Poland wants to increase its capabilities 
in the short term dramatically. This puts   Warsaw in a weak negotiating position with 
potential contractors and drives up the price.   The price is also being driven up by the war in 
Ukraine itself, which is creating demand for all   kinds of munitions and military technology, 
while global supply is severely limited. Poland, therefore, having, in principle, a good 
strategic understanding, made no use of this fact   and did not start its own force modernisation 
earlier. The result is billions of dollars more   in costs and long times of delivery. And all 
this with an aggressive Russia in the east. One consequence of the hectic pace is the lack 
of time for a multi-dimensional analysis of the   needs of the Polish armed forces - it is hard to 
talk about such an analysis when programmes worth   billions of dollars are announced one after 
the other within the space of a few months.   As a result, some purchase decisions, 
such as the decision to buy FA-50   aircraft or plans to buy nearly 100 very 
expensive American Apache helicopters,   are often questioned by military analysts. Perhaps even more important case, 
is the degree of Polish industrial   presence and technology transfer in the overall 
modernisation process. Some of the orders will   be manufactured in Poland to some extent, 
but the fact of suddenly buying equipment,   often “off the shelf”, naturally has a 
negative impact on the development of   the domestic defence industry and creates 
an outflow of capital from the country. Finally, can Poland afford such a massive 
army? The spending of $130 billion - the   equivalent of Ukraine's national GDP - is 
only the procurement part. Analysts estimate   that procurement accounts for only 30% of future 
maintenance and upkeep costs. Thus, the total cost   of current arms programmes over the next 30-40 
years could reach up to half a trillion dollars.   And let us not forget that we are talking 
about a medium-sized European country. That   is also why Warsaw's announcement that it will 
increase its defence spending to 4% or even 5%   of GDP - the highest level in NATO - is not just 
a short-term measure but a commitment for decades. In addition to the financial issue, there are 
concerns that modernisation will not be able   to cope with Poland's demographics. With one of 
the lowest birth rates in the world, increasing   the number of soldiers in the army from 150,000 
to 300,000 is troublesome, to say the least. That said - can Poland afford such an 
effort? The best answer - given Poland’s   history - would be that Poland cannot 
afford not to make that effort. But,   the implementation process itself 
could have been much better. Now that we know the main reason why Poland is 
building one of the strongest armies in Europe,   and leaving aside economic 
fundamentals and implementation,   let us look at the structure of foreign 
partners. Returning to the overview from   the beginning of the material, 
we can quickly identify 3 trends. First, the dominance of the Anglo-Saxons,   especially the Americans.
Second, the near complete lack   of European partners.
Third, South Korea. And they all interconnected. The Americans are traditionally seen 
in Poland as the most crucial allies,   which is historically rooted in similar interests 
in the Old Continent. The Americans have always   opposed the German-Russian rapprochement, which 
is the vital interest of Poland as well. Moreover,   among NATO members, Washington has by far 
the greatest capacity and motivation to   come to Poland's aid should Article 5 of 
the North Atlantic Treaty be activated. Western Europe also has an industry ready to 
provide Warsaw with the needed capabilities - the   French and Germans in particular. Nevertheless, 
the years of pre-war rapprochement between Berlin   and Paris and Moscow deepened the Polish 
mistrust towards German and French capitals,   especially on such a sensitive issue 
as security. The policies of Berlin and   Paris at the beginning of the invasion 
of Ukraine only deepened this distrust. Warsaw feared a scenario in which, if 
it were Poland, which Russia attacked,   the supply of spare parts for German 
tanks or French helicopters, for example,   could be sanctioned by French and German interests 
rather than Polish ones. This could take the form,   for example, of imposing peace on the Poles 
against their will. Reports of such proposals to   the Ukrainians widely circulated in the media, 
especially in the first months of the war. A third player - South Korea - fit the puzzle 
perfectly. I t was the alternative Warsaw needed. While the Americans may have common 
security interests with Poland,   they are not necessarily interested 
in transferring key technologies to   Poland or in lowering the price when the 
customer is desperate to buy the product.   The Koreans, on the other hand, have seized 
the moment to make an offer that is not only   often more economically feasible but also 
opens up new opportunities for Warsaw. The Koreans are not only offering to 
transfer technology and the perspective   of Polish variants of the K2PL tank, 
for example, but it looks they also   want to establish a permanent military 
industry bridgehead in Europe with the   Poles which could eventually compete with 
the German and French arms industries. Apart from Poland, there are many potential 
customers, in particular - Ukraine. But also,   for example, Romania, which shares 
many interests, or the Baltic states.   South Korea is, therefore, both a bargaining chip 
for Poland in its talks with the Americans and   an alternative to European partners, 
which could become its competitors. Thus, in the short to medium term, the Polish 
army is to be able to defend the country against   Russia or, even better, deter Moscow from any 
aggressive moves. The aim is also to replace   the loss of military equipment that Warsaw has 
handed over in large quantities to Ukraine. Nevertheless, a powerful army could 
provide Poland with the basis for   projects that go beyond the most basic 
objective of defending its independence.   Some see this as a first step towards realising 
the idea of an Intermarium - a bloc of Central   and Eastern European states with similar 
interests, seeking to counterbalance the   economic dominance of Berlin and Paris 
and the military dominance of Moscow. The idea is not new. But so far, Warsaw 
has little to offer potential partners,   even though they might have considered such 
a route for the region. This may now change.   Poland’s military buildup will create 
an army that may even exceed its needs.   Therefore, Warsaw could offer to 
extend its own security architecture   to countries in the region that seek 
deterrence against similar threats. The ultimate goal would be to create a bloc that 
would speak with a common voice in Europe and the   world. There is no doubt that Poland's most 
important partner in such a project would be   post-war Ukraine, which would also be a regional 
military power in its own right. The Baltic states   also share a similar interest. Romania and 
Moldova, free of Russian influence, cannot   be ruled out either. Belarus would also be key in 
the event of the fall of the Lukashenko regime. Belarus is another reason for the need to 
modernise the Polish armed forces. The news about   the Wagner group is one thing, but if the regime 
in Minsk collapses, instability could spread to   Poland. A civil war could also break out, and 
Warsaw would want to support one side or the   other, most likely in alliance with Ukraine. To do 
that, you surely need a big enough military stock. Warsaw is already quietly implementing the 
measures described above. The most important is,   of course, close cooperation 
with Ukraine in the military,   economic and social spheres. But 
other initiatives are also underway. At the beginning of June, Polish 
President Andrzej Duda presented   his Lithuanian counterpart Gitanas Nauseda 
with a proposal for the deployment of Polish   troops in Lithuania. The Lithuanian described 
the proposal as "very interesting". A Polish   military contingent is already stationed in 
the Latvian town of Adazi. Poland also wants   to support Moldova - a country constantly 
penetrated by Russian influence. Chisinau   recently received from Warsaw six planes 
with weapons for the Moldovan police. Poland, therefore, wants to 
become an entity that is not   only a security recipient but also its donor. But while supra-regional cooperation on 
security issues between Warsaw and the   regional capitals is conceivable, it cannot 
be sustained long-term without an economic   setting based on technological 
development. And in this respect,   Germany’s dominance is unquestionable. Poland's 
GDP is nominally six times smaller than Germany's.   Given that the creation of a consolidated bloc of 
states east of the Oder river is not in Berlin's   interest, it can be assumed that the Germans 
will suppress any attempts at consolidation.   And to counter this, Germany simply has 
much greater financial capacity than Warsaw. In this context, the issue of South Korea 
is relevant once again. When discussing the   prospect of Intermarium, the economic argument was 
usually the logical end of the discussion - the   project simply has no economic basis without the 
Germans. For a while, Warsaw hoped that perhaps   the Americans, without looking at the Germans, 
would make a wave of investments in the region   that would ensure economic development. But this 
has never happened on the required scale. Although   the US company Intel is opening a semiconductor 
assembly and testing plant in Poland worth almost   $5 billion, Intel's more important and four 
times more expensive factory will most likely   be built near the German city of Magdeburg. The 
same is true of Tesla's choice of location for   its Gigafactory - Poland was considered, but the 
final choice was Berlin. With such investments,   Germany can always offer investors bigger 
subsidies and concessions than Poland. Intel   in Magdeburg, for example, is expecting up 
to $10 billion in subsidies from the Germans. Meanwhile, Korea, as one of the world's economic 
powerhouses, competes with German manufacturers in   many areas, such as the automotive and arms 
industries. Seoul could therefore act as a   kind of technological accelerator for the new 
bloc, without having to look to the Americans.   Korea and Poland are not only cooperating on a 
multi-billion dollar military contract. The Korean   conglomerate LG has Europe's largest battery 
factory near Wroclaw, while Poland's energy   transformation is to include a nuclear power 
plant built in partnership with Korea's KHNP.   Warsaw and Seoul are also discussing cooperation 
in the automotive sector, including electric cars.   The president of the Polish Investment and 
Trade Agency (PAIH), Paweł Kurtasz, said that   14 investment projects worth €3.9 billion were 
currently underway in cooperation with South   Korea. These would result in the employment 
of 5,500 people if they came to fruition. This naturally leads to points of contention 
on the Berlin-Warsaw-Seoul triangle. These can   already be seen today, for example, looking on 
the energy market. The Germans are pushing ahead   with their strategy of phasing out nuclear power, 
while at the same time criticising Polish plans   to build nuclear power stations with, among 
others, Korean participation. We should also   mention a dispute between the American company 
Westinghouse and the Korean KHNP over using   Westinghouse’s nuclear technology. Both companies 
are to build nuclear power stations in Poland. In summary, the trilateral convergence 
of interests between Poland,   Korea and the Central-Eastern European 
countries could be described as follows.   Poland reforms and modernises its armed forces, 
using Korean technology, among others. Then   extends a medium-sized security umbrella over the 
countries of the region, probably supported by the   battle-hardened Ukrainian army. Seoul provides 
the region with technology and investment,   offering an alternative to Germany's 
hitherto monopolistic position in the region. For Central European countries 
including Poland, the aim would be   to escape subcontractor status in the German 
supply chain and break the glass ceiling of   being in an economically and technologically 
peripheral position compared to Western Europe. For Korea, the obvious impetus would be 
to enter the European market in a big   way and provide its industry with 
a magnitude of orders for decades. All this is happening with the tacit encouragement 
of the Americans, for whom a solid wedge between   Germany and Russia is a desirable arrangement. 
Some would argue that the US even supports such   plans. Washington is establishing the permanent 
headquarters of the Fith US Army's Corps in   Poland - until now, Germany was the site of the 
most easterly permanent American stationing.   The US is also the largest supplier of arms to 
Poland, and two of the three nuclear power plants   are to be built in cooperation with the 
American company Westinghouse. In addition,   there is the aforementioned Intel plant and 
billion-dollar investments by Microsoft or Google. The fact that the entire group of states in the 
region share a common history and often common   oppressors is also inevitably important for the 
project's success. Which, again, converts into   a common worldview. The consolidation of this 
area is a somewhat structural and historical   phenomenon, as was proven by the centuries-old 
project of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. Still, a desire to bring the medieval colossus 
back to life in a new reality can be described   only as a utopia. The most likely scenario 
is an informal coalition of states speaking   with one voice on security issues and 
key development branches. Coordination   of the bloc could occur through existing 
formats such as the 'Three Seas Initiative',   the 'Bucharest Nine' or the 'Lublin Triangle'. On 
the other hand, the 'Visegrad Group' is unlikely   to be relevant and will lose importance as 
the Budapest government is close to Moscow.   The same might be the case with Bratislava, 
which increasingly drifts towards Russia. Moreover, Ukraine's admission into NATO structures 
would potentially further strengthen the prospects   of such an initiative. The new bloc, whatever it 
might be called, would not be in opposition to   the European Union. Given Brussels' strong support 
in the region, this is rather out of the question. The unprecedented modernisation of the Polish 
armed forces is, therefore, a multifaceted event.   At the most basic level, it is intended to help 
defend the country against the real threat of   aggression from the Russian Federation. 
Although Moscow is bleeding in Ukraine,   in the event of a cessation of hostilities 
and a change in the international situation,   it has the opportunity to reconstitute 
its forces in the foreseeable future,   thus continuing to pose a 
threat to Poland and the region. On the second level, Warsaw, in partnership with 
the Koreans, wants to create an armaments base   in Europe that could compete with the French, 
German or Italian military centres. It would feed   off the growing demand for military equipment 
in Europe and the rest of the world caused by   the unstable international situation. However, 
its main customers would be Poland and Ukraine. Finally, the military power, arms industry and 
technological know-how provided by the Korean   cooperation would allow Poland and other countries 
of the region to form a bloc of states in Central   and Eastern Europe with similar intentions, 
challenging the region's semi-peripheral   position vis-à-vis Western Europe. Of course, 
this is not about weakening ties with the West   or breaking the EU treaty but about changing 
the relationship status from that of a junior   partner to the equal one. Of course, there are 
a thousand reasons why this plan could fail,   but this seems to be the strategy 
that Warsaw is currently pursuing.|||Enjoy Warsaw from above in our photobook
WARSAW ON AIR - available at www.POLANDONAIR.com :) Don't forget to subscribe to our channel ;)|||Punch the communist, in his every form because today he is your biggest enemy! It was him, who, with your brothers' bones paved the chain of his endless roads! It was him, who kidnapped your children to Siberia and made a funny song from their cries. It is him, who tars the name of our fathers and puts on them the communist yoke It was him, who in the dark Katyn forest vilely stuck a knife in the polish chest murdering there the best of poland's sons like an evil thug, vicious traitor, coward! It was him, who worshipped Stalin like a deity and spared no pain for your own priests It was him, who made cinemas from churches and treads the cross, adoring a red star It is him, who forces not to believe besotting us with the might of some red rags to kill any humanity within your heart to made you unaware of what does "brother" mean It was him, who plundered your wealth and sucks the blood from our wounds It is him, who values a dog more than you because you're a Pole, so villain and a polish propertied man It is him, who, preaching about fraternity locks in jail the best of our youth to kill any humanity within your heart to made you unaware of what does "brother" mean So take the veil off of your eyes, dear brother May the horn of our forefothers sound again Punch the communist, in his every form because he is your biggest enemy today! PUNCH THE COMMUNIST, IN HIS EVERY FORM BECOUSE HE IS THE BIGGEST OF YOUR FOES!|||It’s rare that a direction on a compass
can carry such loaded connotations, and yet, in discussing the history of Europe, “East”
is a complicated word. In the past few centuries, “Eastern Europe”
earned an unfair reputation for backwardness, poverty, and unsophistication, for reasons
we will see. It’s also rare for the simple act of reading
history to cause me physical and psychological pain. And yet… Poland … For reasons we will see. Our notions of Polish hardship tend to focus
on the 1900s, what with the Soviets and the Nazis out and about — but Poland’s status
as the volleyball of Europe actually goes back quite a ways. Yet despite the best attempts of half a dozen
different empires, Poland would not die, and that is worth investigating. So, to see how Poland’s story unfolds (and
find out what Lithuania has to do with it), Let’s do some History! Being well outside of the Roman and Holy Roman
empires, we don’t get much on Poland until the medieval period, when Duke Mieszko I converted
to Catholicism in 966 and began expanding his Duchy out across the northern European
plain, reaching up to the Baltic Sea and down to the Carpathian Mountains. His son Boleslaw I negotiated with Holy Roman
Emperor Otto III to grant Poland an independent Church governance, adding 3 new bishoprics
to their original one, and a shiny archbishopric in the capital of Gniezno. To celebrate, Boleslaw promoted himself to
King, but made the classic goof of splitting the kingdom between his sons. The hope was to keep government local and
responsive, but the real result was several functionally-independent minor dukedoms who
occasionally threw hands at each other. His grandson brought the kingdom back together,
but then it got divided again in 1138, and it stayed that way for 2 centuries. A consequence of this was a move away from
a single rigid hierarchy to a more dynamic society of tenant-farmers, merchants, and
nobles spread out across market towns, church lands, and noble estates. Meanwhile, the Crown’s relative weakness
was an opening for the Church to educate, govern, and shape Polish culture. It’s at this surprisingly early stage that
an idea approximating nationalism appears, as the church at the time was the only major
body that transcended local politics, and some clergy vocally advocated for a reunified
state under the polish crown. Hang on to that theme of indivisibility, it
comes up later. Another big change came in the form of people,
as Germans from the HRE and persecuted Jews came to settle in Poland. In 1264 King Boleslaw V granted Jews personal
freedoms and legal protections, which was a major rarity elsewhere in Christendom. And this welcome got a lot warmer during the
reign of Kazimierz III, who extended Jewish freedoms to the entire kingdom in 1334 and
encouraged more Jews to come to Poland. Kazimierz also gets points for codifying laws,
issuing a new standard currency, founding the first Polish university, unifying the
political machinery of the Kingdom (that’s a big one), and recouping some of the land
lost a century earlier to the Teutonic knights in the north and the Mongols in the east. The man was busy! And late Medieval Poland didn’t slow down. After Kazimierz, the crown passed through
his sister to her husband Ludwik of Hungary. That wasn’t the best match, as he confiscated
some Polish territory for Hungary and bribed the nobles with special privileges to let
him do what he wanted, but after him, his daughter Jadwiga became queen of Poland, and
she married Grand Duke Jogaila of Lithuania, which bound the Kingdom of Poland to the Duchy
of Lithuania in a personal union. Lithuania was very large, but also very pagan,
so as part of the marriage deal, Jogaila and his state converted to Christianity. Despite one of history’s largest overnight
conversions, the two states remained very different, and the Teutonic knights along
the coast saw Lithuania as barbarous pagans, so they tried to invade, but lost at the battle
of Grunwald in 1410. In the century after the union, late-medieval
Poland saw its first local assemblies of nobles, and in the 1490s the Szlachta (as they’re
known in polish) formed a statewide parliament, called the Sejm. By the 1500s, Renaissance arts and ideas made
their way north. And, when paired with good administration,
some nice reforms, and hefty resource exports to western Europe, Poland was living it up
in a golden age. You know Copernicus? With the heliocentrism? Yeah, Poland. Now, the Personal Union between Poland and
Lithuania was a familiar political arrangement, Europe made these things all the time, but
it was rare they lasted two whole centuries. In that span, Lithuania began to resemble
Poland in a few key ways, but it was still its own country, and opposed to a simple incorporation. So after some political wrangling, the Union
of Lublin in 1569, nice, established a bi-federal state with a jointly elected King/Grand-Duke
and a bicameral parliament of the noble Sejm [biannual] and a Senate [standing]. The Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, as it
was to be known, had independent local laws, treasuries, and armies for each state — and
if this all sounds kind of insane, that’s because it is, which is the best part. At a time when the rest of Europe was big
on centralized government and royal absolutism, the Commonwealth was a federal monarchy, which
was elected by a parliament of nobles, who themselves accounted for 10% of the population. That’s nearly how many people could vote
in Democratic Athens. To make this outlier even more extreme, the
Commonwealth in the 1600s was one of the largest and most populous countries in Europe, with
11 million people spread over 400,000 sq mi. That included Poles, Lithuanians, Germans,
Belarusians and Ukrainians, Jews, and Tatars; and between Catholics, Protestants, Orthodox,
3/4 of the world’s Jews & even some Muslims, it was astoundingly diverse, in part because
it stood at the crossroads of several different cultures. But this regional centrality would become
dangerous in the next two centuries, as basically every empire in a 500-mile radius was keen
to grow larger at Poland’s expense. Various threats came and went, but sometimes
two would rear up at once, such as the later 1650s, when Sweden and Russia both invaded
Lithuania in what’s known as The Deluge. Cities were ransacked and plundered, and the
whole commonwealth briefly shrank to very small. The Commonwealth survived, but between war
and ensuing plague, it was gravely wounded: a quarter of the population dead, vulnerable
to outside threats, and falling into a governing crisis. See, the Republic had become a tragic victim
of its own lofty ideology. Wanting to avoid even the slightest whiff
of absolutism, the Sejm had a Liberum Veto which allowed any member of the Szlachta to
stop debate. In the best of times, this gave contrarians
an instant handbrake on the entire legislative process, but it was also laughably easy for
foreign powers to abuse. A single bribe could throw a critical reform
right out the window. So by the 1700s, the Sejm regularly failed
to reach any decisions. This was good news for the empires that encircled
Poland, as Russia, Prussia, and Austria all stood to gain from Poland’s newfound weakness,
and wanted to make it their puppet state. In 1764 Russia installed Stanislaw II as King,
and 4 years later a Confederation of nobles at Bar threw a rebellion against Russian influence
and interference, soooo Russia invaded and then Prussia and Austria just kind of also
invaded while Poland was distracted. By 1772 a third of the Commonwealth was partitioned
between the three empires. From here, King Stanislaw was stuck between
doing nothing and letting things get worse, or going rogue and actually trying to fix
Poland’s problems, which would provoke the empires, and make things get worse. To his credit, he went for it, calling a four-year
Great Sejm in 1788 to write out a new constitution for the state, and a really good one too,
they even dropped the Liberum Veto. But, of course, this was way out of line,
so Russia and Prussia and then later Austria invaded with the explicit goal of wiping Poland
off the map. By 1795 the three empires had partitioned
the entire commonwealth, and Poland-Lithuania was fully gone. … Poof. SO… what does one do when an ancestral homeland
gets sliced up like a birthday cake? That’s a good question. Well, as the 1800s show, you write poetry,
paint, and throw a lot of revolts. Poland was right along many Europeans in channeling
Romantic Era ideals into a struggle for nationhood. But Poland’s situation was a little unique,
as they had a nation, and in the cultural sense they still did, but they didn’t have
a state. In an interesting return to the 1200s, ideology
focused on the church as a cultural anchor point for Polishness. And this meant that “Poland” as a concept
narrowed significantly, away from the multiethnic and multifaith society of the commonwealth
and towards what we’d call ethnonationalism. Yikes. Really running with that Catholicism angle,
Polish thinkers conceived of their country as The Christ of Nations, which died in the
partition as a martyr for other nations and would one day re-emerge. I mean, in hindsight, not strictly wrong! Polish life under partition differed between
the three empires. After some short-lived Napoleonic shenanigans,
the “Congress Kingdom of Poland” existed as a vassal state under the supervision and
direct governance of the Russian Empire. Later in the century it was stripped of what
autonomy it had and got absorbed fully into Russia. The situation was a little better in Austria,
as the Polish-majority province of Galicia was quite poor, but decently autonomous, and
Galicia became a center of polish consciousness as the century progressed. By contrast, Prussia, later Germany, had no
taste whatsoever for Polish culture, and pushed for Germanization across the whole empire
but onto Poland especially. Germany’s slice of Poland gained from the
industrial revolution, but it was a pretty patchy process overall. And across the board, post-hoc justifications
for partition relied on harsh stereotypes that have endured to this day. No no no, guys, you don’t get it, it’s
not that we’re greedy, it’s that they’re bad, and don’t deserve to exist! Colonization attitudes, in my Europe? It’s more likely than you think. Despite several attempts at uprising made
over the century, none succeeded, and over 3 million Poles emigrated for the United States. It seemed as though the only hope for a revived
Poland was the complete collapse of the great European empires — but as it happened, that
would not take long. And as we step into the first World War, I’ve
got to work very hard to not fall into the infinite web of tangents and books-worth of
footnotes for 1900s history. So WWI in the East was not a game of trench
warfare, but armies constantly on the move causing widespread destruction. The collapse of all three partitioning empires
and sympathy among the allied powers cleared the room for a new Polish state to rise out
of the war, but there was constant friction with the other new postwar states, such as
Lithuania. Meanwhile, Germany and Soviet Russia hated
all of this, so Poland’s task of reunifying and running their state also faced external
pressure of German posturing and full-on Soviet invasion. In September of 1939 the Nazis invaded Poland
and the Soviet Union followed two weeks later, partitioning Poland just like the olden days. Russians persecuted class and political enemies,
Germans persecuted race enemies. And so the Holocaust happened. Death-camps like Auschwitz contributed to
the systematic death of 5 million Poles, 3 million of whom were Jewish. They also killed Polish politicians, priests,
and thinkers in a bid to exterminate polish culture. In the face of this utter barbarity, the Polish
resistance was among the strongest in Europe, staging two mass uprisings and organizing
military operations across the continent. Poles played a key role in cracking the Enigma
mechanism, and were vital pilots in the Battle of Britain. This got marginally better but infinitely
more uncomfortable when Russia joined the Allies, and after the war the soviets turned
Poland into a communist satellite state. Once again Poland was materially and demographically
devastated by the conflict, and the heavy-handed policies of Stalinism weren’t the most helpful
in the rebuilding process. Over the decades various reforms were made
and undone and then made again and so on, and once again, the Church acted as a vehicle
for Polish unity, this time in opposition to communism. The election of Cardinal Wojtyla of Krakow
as Pope John Paul II was an indescribably huge deal for Poland. After the Trade Union “Solidarity” started
in 1980 and gained a huge following among Polish workers, support from America and the
Vatican helped it become the main political opposition against the communist government,
and the church facilitated the negotiations to allow Solidarity to participate in the
elections of 1989, which broke the Communist monopoly on power. Poland’s pathway out of Communism in the
‘90s and beyond brought another series of struggles, but it’s largely a space they’ve
been before. And that’s one of the most confounding aspects
of Polish history: there are so many plotlines that seem to echo across time, and there’s
also so much that couldn’t have happened anywhere else. Who could wind up with a government system
as absolutely bonkers as the Commonwealth? It’s amazing. Polish history can read like a tragedy, ‘cause
often it is, but the Polish people have more than demonstrated that’s no reason for fatalism. Thank you so much for watching! I’d like to apologize for the quality of
my Polish pronunciation, because while I often like to try, it’s rare that I succeed. And of course, I’d like to thank our community
on Patreon for supporting the work we do — some of their names can be seen scrolling along
right here. I’ll see you all in the next video.|||By 1919, the First World War had left the old 
European order in ruins and radically redrawn   the map. A new Polish republic struggled 
to establish itself, while the Bolsheviks   struggled to secure their revolution in Russia. 
In the midst of the chaos, the two new states   launched into a full-scale war that will ravage 
Eastern Europe again: it’s the Polish-Soviet War. In 1918 and 1919, both the 2nd Polish republic 
and Bolshevik Russia were fighting on many fronts.   The Poles fought the Germans, Czechoslovaks, 
Lithuanians, and Western Ukrainians over disputed   borders, while the revolutionary Bolsheviks 
fought the counter-revolutionary Whites,   Allied intervention forces, and national 
independence movements in the Baltics and   Ukraine. The border between Poland and Russia was 
still up in the air in spite of the efforts of   the Allied peace delegations at the Paris Peace 
Conference, who supported Poland but disagreed   on where its eastern border should be and how 
much military help they should provide. The   Allies proposed the Curzon Line as a border, 
but this satisfied neither the Poles nor the   Bolsheviks – nor others who claimed parts of the 
region, like Belarus, Lithuania, the White Russian   movement , and two Ukrainian National Republics.
In Poland, Head of State Josef Pilsudski and his   socialist party favoured a federation under Polish 
leadership that would stretch from the Baltic to   the Black Sea , but Roman Dmowski’s National 
Democrats wanted a more compact nation-state   with a Polish-speaking majority. In Moscow, 
Bolshevik leaders also argued about their   goals. Some wanted to concentrate on defeating 
the Whites and establishing a Soviet state in   most of the old Russian empire, while others 
insisted on pushing the Red Army as far west   as it could go to bring the revolution to Europe.
Meanwhile, people living in Poland and Russia had   been suffering since 1914. Battles, harsh 
occupation by Austria-Hungary and Germany,   and the new wars after 1918 brought poverty, 
hunger, and disease that killed millions. The   coming war between Poland and Bolshevik 
Russia would only add to their misery. In early 1919, German troops left their 
occupation zone in the east, which allowed   Polish and Red Army units to advance into the gap. 
Neither side had a critical mass of troops for a   conventional campaign, so they instead engaged in 
skirmishes, guerilla fighting, and cavalry raids,   and used paramilitary forces as well. The Poles 
drove the Bolsheviks from Minsk in August,   and took control of Eastern Galicia from the 
short-lived Western Ukrainian Republic. At the   same time, the Red Army had its hands full until 
the fall with White forces driving towards Moscow.  Warsaw had gained new territories but they 
were not easy to administer. The local   population was of mixed ethnicity, language, and 
religion, and while many patriots welcomed the   Polish army as their own, others did not. 
Even amongst Polish-speaking Catholics,   local identity was sometimes more important than 
that of the new Polish state. Some Polish troops   also acted harshly towards the locals, especially 
Jews – although this was against official policy   and the army tightened up discipline soon 
after. Polish-Lithuanian-German Michael   von Römer/Michal Roemer/Mykolas Roemeris wrote 
in his diary in March 1919: “The Polish troops’   advance onto Lithuanian-Belarusian soil […] 
is sad and pitiful in nature, and certainly   cannot contribute to glorifying Poland in the 
hearts and minds of the local people and is   not conducive to the idea of those lands uniting 
with the Polish state voluntarily.” (Boehler 154)  The Bolsheviks Russia also had trouble imposing 
its will on the peasants and non-Russians in the   borderlands. Many people resented and resisted the 
Red Army’s political terror, looting, or pogroms,   or opposed Russian domination. On the other 
hand some locals did support the Bolsheviks,   often because they feared the return 
of the Polish landowners. Overall,   locals were more worried about how any 
armed force in their area would behave,   more than which state or nation 
was winning the war. (Boehler 152) In 1920, the Polish-Bolshevik border clashes 
escalated into a full-blown war. Polish-Russian   negotiations in March and April failed, partly 
due to maximalist demands by the Polish side,   and partly because most leading Bolsheviks, 
like Vladimir Lenin and War Commissar   Leon Trotsky, wanted to continue the war.
Both sides prepared for renewed hostilities:   the Bolsheviks brought up reinforcements that 
were freed up by victories against the Whites,   including the famous First Cavalry Army 
under Semyon Budyonni, whose ranks included   future WW2 commanders Giorgy Zhukov and 
Semyon Timoshenko, and writer Isaac Babel.   To reach the western front they fought their way 
past yet another faction in the Russian Civil War:   the Ukrainian anarchist army under Nestor Makhno.
The Poles felt they needed to strike before the   Red Army completed its pivot 
west. Pilsudski was confident:   “I am not afraid of Russia’s power. If I wanted 
to, I could now advance as far as Moscow,   and nobody would be able to withstand my power.” 
(Borzecki 27). To help its cause, Poland entered   into an alliance with the Kyiv-based Ukrainian 
National Republic under Symon Petlura. The   UNR had been defeated by the Reds and was 
sheltering in Galicia – and they hoped the   alliance with Poland would lead to a smaller but 
independent Ukraine if Russia could be defeated.  On April 25, 1920, 75,000 Polish troops and 12,000 
Ukrainian soldiers launched the Kyiv Offensive.   Opposing them were probably about 30,000 men of 
the Red Army, since Budyonni’s cavalry had not   yet arrived. The Polish 3rd army under General 
Smigly-Rydz struck the main blow towards Kyiv,   and at first they swept all before them in a war 
of movement. Polish cavalry dashed ahead, and   the outnumbered Bolsheviks retreated as quickly 
as they could with minimal resistance. The main   Polish force entered the city unopposed May 7, and 
the entire operation cost the Poles just 150 dead   and 300 wounded (Davies 110), while the Red Army’s 
losses were unknown but probably much heavier. So the Poles had won a great victory and 
captured Kyiv, but the Red Army was not   destroyed. Poland was not strong enough 
to launch a full-scale invasion of Russia,   and the Bolsheviks still had 
the means to strike back. With Poles in control of Eastern 
Galicia and much of central Ukraine,   they had the chance for a strategic political 
victory: an independent Ukraine that would fight   against Russia alongside them. Pilsudski 
made a friendly declaration on April 26:   “I formally declare that the foreign invaders, 
against whom the Ukrainian people have risen   sword in hand to defend their homes from rape, 
banditry and looting, will be removed by the   Polish force from territories inhabited by 
the Ukrainian nation. The Polish forces will   remain in the Ukraine for such time as may 
be necessary to enable a legitimate Ukrainian   government to take control.” (Davies 110)
There is some debate about whether Pilsudski   really wanted a fully independent 
Ukraine or a buffer state to gain   time in the fight against Russia, but in any 
case Petlura failed to establish a working   administration or win over enough of the 
long-suffering and distrustful population.   The last of many attempts at an independent 
Ukraine after the First World War failed.  Far from the battlefields, Poland was also 
wrestling with political problems. Opposition   leader Dmowski was not happy about the alliance 
with Ukraine, some Polish communists went on   strike. British Prime Minister David Lloyd George 
was especially critical: “The Poles are inclined   to be arrogant and they will have to take care 
they don’t get their heads punched.” (Davies 112)   The League of Nations in Geneva even accused 
Poland of a premeditated attack on Russia.  For the Bolsheviks, the Kyiv Offensive was a 
political gift. They claimed Russia was under   attack by the same Polish aristocratic landowning 
class that was resented by many Ukrainian   peasants, some of whom joined the Bolsheviks. 
Even former Imperial Russian General Aleksei   Brusilov rallied to the Bolshevik side. g
Other Bolshevik thinkers like Mikhail   Kalinin saw the war as the chance 
to spread the revolution to Europe:  “I believe the Polish lords by marching on 
the Soviet republic are only digging their   own graves […] but they will only succeed 
in founding yet another Soviet state through   which we will gain close relations with the 
proletariat of the west.” g (Davies 114)  Although Trotsky was worried about 
the weak state of the Red Army,   the Bolsheviks launched an offensive in 
Belarus on May 15. Under the command of   27-year-old General Mikhail Tukhachevsky, himself 
partly of Polish origin, they drove the Poles   back over 100km and relieved the pressure 
in Ukraine, before Polish counterattacks   stabilized the northern front in June.
In the south, Budyonni’s First Cavalry   finally arrived at the front on May 18, but the 
Red offensive in Ukraine got off to a bad start.   Budyonni lost two armored trains, and the Orenburg 
Cossacks switched over to the Polish side. But   then the Red horsemen changed tactics to operate 
in smaller groups and concentrate on strongpoints,   which led to a breakthrough on June 5 – for 
which Joseph Stalin would later unjustly take   credit since he was the top Bolshevik on 
that part o the font. The Poles managed   to avoid the complete destruction of their 
army partly thanks to Budyonni’s hesitations,   and partly due to their advantage in the air. 
Isaak Babel wrote autobiographical stories   about his experiences, including an attack 
by a Polish-American volunteer squadron:  “They dropped down to three hundred metres and 
shot up first Andrushka and then Trunov. None of   the shots fired by our men did the Americans any 
harm…So after half an hour, we were able to ride   out and fetch the corpses […] All [Trunov’s] 
wounds were in his face, his cheeks punctured   all over, his tongue ripped out.” (Davies 129)
The Red Army took Kyiv on June 10, and reached   Pilsudski’s former headquarters 
at Rivne at the start of July. So the Poles had taken half of Ukraine, 
only to be driven back again early in   the summer of 1920. With the Red Army 
marching west, the spectre of European   revolution was on the horizon, unless the 
desperate Poles could pull off a miracle. The Bolshevik command was now ready to launch 
an offensive across the entire length of the   front – and Tukhechevsky announced the revolution 
would advance over the corpses of White Poland.  In the south, the Red Army reached 
Lviv after a hard-fought advance,   and laid siege to the town in early August. 
Babel recalled the aftermath and the corpses:   “A field of horror, strewn with mangled 
dead, inhuman cruelty, unimaginable wounds,   crushed skulls, young, white naked bodies 
flashing in the sun, lost notebooks laying about,   single pages, paybooks, prayer books, human 
cadavers in the grain.” (Lehnstaedt 89)  But the main Red offensive came in the north, in 
July. The Bolsheviks outnumbered the Poles 160,000   to 115,000 in men, and had a crucial 3 to 
1 advantage in artillery. Red Army cavalry   under General Gaia Gai led the advance, who 
managed to defeat a Polish force equipped   with French tanks at Grodno on the 19th.
The Poles intercepted Red Army telegrams,   and they even re-used old German trenches 
from the First World War – but they could   not stop the Bolsheviks. During the Red Army’s 
advance, Lithuania joined in the fighting to   recover the disputed city of Vilnius from 
the Poles, though the Reds insisted it   was theirs. By August 1, the Red Army was 
just 200km from Warsaw. A week after that,   Tukhachevsky’s spearheads were northwest of the 
Polish capital, threatening it with encirclement.  The series of Polish defeats plunged the 
country into a crisis. Pilsudski was painfully   aware of the situation: “This breakdown of our 
forces, this sinking morale was, in my view,   [Tukhachevski’s] greatest triumph.” (Lehnstaedt 
89) and he later admitted: “I could not trust   the morale of the troops or the civilians, or 
the leaders of either group.” (Lehnstaedt 115).  Pilsudski twice offered his resignation 
as head of state, the Prime Minister did   resign and a new government formed. The crisis 
also worsened already tense relations between   Catholics and Jews. Because many associated 
Jews with Bolshevism, the War Ministry reduced   the army to 5% Jewish soldiers, and put the 
rest into labour battalions to dig trenches.  The war also divided some urban Poles from 
their rural countrymen. Middle class, urban   and middle class Poles mostly supported the war 
effort and saw it as a struggle for their nation   and Christian civilization. 100,000 men, mostly 
students, scouts and craftsmen volunteered for the   army, and middle and upper class women volunteered 
in non-combat roles like nursing. Most workers’   unions also supported the cause. Polish aristocrat 
Prince Lubomirski reflected this view in a speech:   “The war which Poland is carrying on is not one 
of conquest, but exclusively one of defense. The   Bolsheviks invaded Poland at the moment of 
its liberation and we were forced to take up   arms in our defense. […] We have only wanted to 
protect those regions peopled by Polish subjects,   to liberate them from the oppression of 
Bolshevism, and to create around us friendly   nations who will stand with us against 
the barbarism of the East.” (Reed 223)  Polish peasants, on the other hand, were 
sometimes more hesitant, since they were   less likely to feel strongly connected to the 
idea of Polish nationhood. Patriotic volunteer   Michal Slowikowski recalled a peasant soldier 
scoffing at the notion of national honour:   “What does honor give me when the lice are 
biting?! […] Do [our soldiers] all have boots   on their feet? And you know how many haven’t got 
shirts? […] Honor, my ass! If there’s nothing to   eat, the lice are biting, and the soldiers 
have no underpants. […] Whoever wants war is   welcome to fight, but it’s a farmer’s job 
to cultivate the soil.” (Boehler 134-135)  Poland was both united and divided in the face 
of defeat, and Warsaw called on its British and   French allies to help. The Allies sent weapons 
and a Military Commission to advise the Poles,   including French officer Charles De Gaulle, but 
neither country was willing to enter the war . On   the diplomatic front, the British and French tried 
to force both side to accept the Curzon Line and   get the Bolsheviks to accept Polish independence.
Behind the scenes, the Bolsheviks also faced   internal troubles. Commander in Chief Sergey 
Kamenev wanted to stop at the Curzon Line,   whereas War Commissar Leon Trotsky thought 
the army should be able to cross the line   temporarily if necessary. Lenin, however, gave 
orders to push past the Line in mid-July. They   set up a Polish Revolutionary Committee 
under Polish Bolshevik Feliks Dzerzhinsky,   head of the Cheka secret police. The Committee 
was crystal clear about their plans for Poland:   “All representatives of the Polish bourgeoisie 
and landowners, all who support White Poland,   will be arrested and sent to 
concentration camps.” (Engelstein 501)  Red leaders also differed as to what to do 
once they had defeated Poland. The Red Army   was too weak to conquer the rest of Europe, 
so Tukhachevsky favoured limited war aims,   like a deal with Weimar Germany over a future 
Russian-German border. Lenin hoped that once   the Red Army took Poland, its simple presence on 
the border with Germany, Romania and Hungary might   set off an unstoppable wave of revolution 
that would not require military conquest.   Some of the rank-and-file, like Isaac Babel, 
were committed to revolution at all costs:   “We will wage war forever. Russia has thrown 
down the gauntlet. We will march into Europe   to conquer the world. The Red Army has become 
a factor in world politics.” (Lehnstaedt 93).  Most Bolshevik leaders did at least 
agree that Poland’s presence in Belarus   and Ukraine was a strategic threat 
to Russia and both ideological and   military motivations caused Moscow 
to push past the Curzon Line. So the Red Army had the Poles on the 
run and was at the gates of Warsaw. The   coming battle would decide whether 
the Polish Republic would survive. As the Red Army moved into Poland, its military 
commanders fought amongst themselves. Trotsky   and Tuchachevsky did not get along with the clique 
of Stalin, Yegorov and Budyonni. This stopped the   Bolsheviks from the making the logical military 
decision to concentrate their forces in the north   under Tukhachevsky. To make matters worse for 
the Reds, they expected the local population   would support them, but they faced hostility from 
the majority of Catholics and Jews. This worsened   their already terrible supply situation, and 
the army was short on food. Morale was low,   and desertions common – by August about 116,000 
Bolshevik troops faced 156,000 Polish defenders.  Still, Tukhachevsky launched his assault on 
Warsaw on August 13, 1920. He knew his forces   were overextended, but gambled that the poles 
would not be able to react in time. On the 14th,   near Radzymin’s Red Army forces pushed back the 
Poles, but Polish General Haller’s defenders   rallied with the help of French-supplied 
tanks, and won a local victory that boosted   morale - some historians have argued that 
this was the decisive turn in the battle.  North of Warsaw, things went equally badly 
for Gaia Gai’s Red cavalry. General Sikorski’s   inexperienced Polish troops pulled off a bold 
counterattack, helped by the chance destruction   of a critical Russian radio, and prevented an 
encirclement . Some historians consider this   battle north of the city to have been the 
decisive moment, not Radzymin. Regardless   of which was more important, both of these 
fronts held long enough for the main Polish   counterattack in the south to start.
The Poles had planned a very risky   counteroffensive, which would lead either to a 
smashing victory, or total defeat. They shifted   units to the southern flank, and then attacked 
north on August 16 to cut off the Bolshevik   armies threatening the capital. But if the Poles 
were too slow, Budyonni’s cavalry might move west   from Lviv and catch the Poles in mid-maneuver. 
Tukhachevsky had learned of the preparations,   but did not believe his intelligence reports. 
If Budyonni had been quicker, he might have   caught the Poles in the flank and turned the 
tide of the battle – but he was too slow.  The Polish attack smashed through weak Red 
Army resistance and raced 120km into the gap.   Budyonni was too far away, and Tukhachevsky’s 
forces were stuck – they couldn’t take Warsaw,   and now the enemy was getting behind them. Three 
Red armies were routed within the space of a few   days, and a chaotic retreat eastwards began. 
Supply trains and artillery were abandoned,   and Gaia Gai’s cavalry was cut off and crossed 
into East Prussia, where they were interned by   the Germans. As the remaining Red forces 
withdrew, the Polish population that had   generally refused to support them now also rose 
up against them, as a Red Army commissar reported:   “[The locals] were extremely hostile to us…In 
many cases the retreating units conducted   rearguard battles with the local population, 
during which the Red Army soldiers dealt   brutally with the insurgents.” (Engelstein 507)
The Polish victory at Warsaw was as complete as it   was surprising. Two thirds of Tukhachevsky’s army 
was killed, wounded or captured – about 100,000   men . In Catholic Poland, many felt that divine 
intervention had granted them victory, and the   battle became known as the Miracle on the Vistula. 
Lenin later reflected on what might have been:   “If Poland had become Soviet, the Versailles 
treaty would have been shattered, and the entire   international system built up by the victors would 
have been destroyed.” (Engelstein 507) Both Lenin   and Trotsky blamed Stalin for the failure since he 
had helped keep Budyonni in Galicia for too long. Not only had Poland prevented a Bolshevik 
conquest and perhaps stopped the spread   of the revolution, but ironically the result of 
the Battle of Warsaw may have had benefits for   the Bolsheviks as well. If they had won, the 
Allies might have intervened and potentially   overthrown them. In the words of historian 
Laura Engelstein: “Polish victory may have   saved Europe from Bolshevism; it also saved 
Bolshevism from Europe.” (Engelstein 510) So by the third week of August 1920, the Poles had 
won a major victory, the Red Army was on the run,   and armistice talks began at Minsk. But 
the Polish-Soviet War was not yet over. In spite of this dramatic victory, Poland 
still faced challenges. Pilsudski’s   Socialists and Dmowski’s National Democrats 
still couldn’t agree on the eastern border,   and relations with Britain and France 
were still difficult . More dangerously,   Poland was still at war with a larger 
and ultimately, more powerful neighbour.  As the Polish army chased the defeated Bolsheviks 
away from the capital, the Red Army forces near   Lviv belatedly moved north to help their comrades. 
But the Poles prepared a trap for the First Red   Cavalry Army outside Zamosc near the village of 
Komarow. Once the Red Cavalry had advanced close   enough to the city and engaged in fighting the 
Poles’ superior numbers of infantry and artillery,   the Poles sprung the trap and encircled the 
Bolsheviks on August 31. The desperate Red   cavalry charged again and again to 
free itself, taking heavy losses but   avoiding complete destruction. The Battle of 
Komarow, known as the Zamosc Ring in Russian,   is considered by many to have been the last great 
cavalry battle in history, and was the biggest   since the Napoleonic Wars a century before .
By September 18, Polish forces had once again   reached Rivne. Exhausted Red forces were a sight 
for sore eyes: “For every fighting man there   are 4 non-combatants, 2 ladies, 2 chests with 
belongings, and even the combat soldier isn’t   fighting […] The Russian infantryman of the 
Red Army – barefoot, not only not modernized,   but really the face of poor Russia [...] bloated, 
lousy, runty, hungry peasants.” (Lehnstaedt 140)   These demoralized units also committed 
several pogroms against Jewish communities   as they withdrew, leading to responsible 
officers being punished (Davies 232).  Tukhachevsky planned to make a stand on 
the Niemen River with fresh reinforcements,   but Polish commanders immediately launched an 
attack to destroy the Bolshevik Western Front.   In the third week of September, at the Battle of 
the Nieman, Polish forces pinned the Bolsheviks   at Hrodno. After some early struggles, Polish 
cavalry crossed through Lithuanian territory,   pushed Lithuanian troops aside, and cut off a key 
railway line. Other Polish forces captured Pinsk,   and the Red Army retreated to Minsk by October 
18. Pilsudski’s order of the day was triumphant:   “Soldiers! You have made Poland strong, confident, 
and free. You can be content with the fulfilment   of your duty. A country, which in two years 
has produced soldiers such as you, can regard   its future with tranquility.” (Davies 238)
In early October, the Poles signed a ceasefire   with the Lithuanians, but the Vilnius Question 
was still unresolved in the eyes of Polish   nationalists. The day before the ceasefire was to 
come into effect Polish General Lucjan Żeligowski   and his 1st Lithuanian–Belarusian Division 
- made up of men from the region serving the   Polish cause - crossed the border and marched on 
Vilnius, easily capturing the city – a strange   end to the brief Polish-Lithuanian War. On the 
18th, Warsaw and Moscow agreed to a ceasefire,   bringing an end to the fighting.
About 200,000 Polish and more than 400,000   Bolshevik soldiers had been killed 
wounded or captured, and up to 450,000   civilians had died (Lehnstaedt 150-151). 
Tens of thousands of prisoners of war held   by both sides also died from hunger and disease .
The Peace of Riga signed in March 1921 shaped the   map of Eastern Europe for the next 20 years. 
The new border ran east of the Curzon Line,   and left the fate of disputed East Galicia 
and Vilnius to Poland. Both formally became   parts of the Polish Republic within a few years. 
The treaty also meant the end of Ukrainian and   Belarussian hopes for independence, as Poland 
and Russia recognized the Russian-controlled   Soviet Republics . Poland now included 1.5 million 
more Poles, but also 6 million more Ukrainians,   Belarussians, and Jews (Leonhardt 1195), and 2 
million Poles remained on the Bolshevik side.  Pilsudski considered the Peace of Riga a failure, 
as he admitted in 1925: “You will not be able to   keep this Poland. The storm that is coming is too 
strong. Today’s Poland can only live in a special,   golden age […] I have wasted my life. I 
wasn’t able to create a federation that   the world would respect.” (Lehnstaedt 156)
But in 1921, flush with a hard-won victory   in a war of national survival, few Poles could 
imagine the uncertain future that lay ahead. Not even 20 years later, Poland was 
ravaged by war once again during the   Second World War and in 1944 Georgy Zhukov 
once again moved through the country. This   time as Soviet Marshal and leading the 1st 
Belorussian Front towards the Oder River   with the ultimate goal of taking Berlin. 
The battle for the capital of the Third   Reich was the dramatic climax on the Eastern 
Front and saw millions of soldiers clash. We   produced a 4.5h documentary series about 
this important battle called 16 Days in   Berlin. A detailed and uncompromising look that 
we couldn’t upload to YouTube because it would   be immediately demonetized or worse. Instead 
you can watch 16 Days in Berlin on Nebula,   a streaming platform we’re building together 
with other creators. Nebula is a great place   where you can enjoy exclusive content like 16 Days 
in Berlin or the Modern Conflict series from Real   Life Lore where you can learn about more recent 
military conflicts like the 2014 Russian invasion   of Crimea. Signing up for Nebula supports us 
directly and your subscription includes so much   more than just exclusive videos. You get all our 
videos ad-free and earlier than on YouTube and   now you also get access to Nebula Classes where 
you can learn new things directly the creators   on Nebula - if you follow link in the video 
description or the pinned comment below this   video you get access to all that for just $30 for 
an entire year, and you support our work directly. If you are watching this video on 
Nebula already, thank you so much   for the support. As usually you can find 
all our sources for this video in the video   description below. I am Jesse Alexander 
and this is a production of Real Time   History – the only history channel that 
has become a factor in world politics.|||>>> AIR RAID SIRENS AND  EXPLOSIONS WERE HEARD ACROSS  THE CRANING CAPITAL OF KYIV AS  RUSSIA LAUNCHED A WAVE OF  STRIKES ACROSS THE COUNTRY  OVERNIGHT.  AT LEAST 18 PEOPLE WERE WOUNDED  IN THE MASSIVE ATTACK.  TWO PEOPLE WERE KILLED BY  SHELLING IN THE SOUTHERN CITY  OF CROISSANT.  THEY SHOT DOWN 36 OF 43  MISSILES FIRED BY RUSSIA.  SO JOINING ME FROM KYIV IS THE  BBC NEWS CORRESPONDENT.  LET'S START WITH THE OVERNIGHT  ATTACKS.  THEY SEEMED LIKE THEY WERE  RATHER WIDESPREAD.  WHAT CAN YOU TELL US ABOUT THEM? >> SADLY THEY ARE PAR FOR THE  COURSE.  EVERY OTHER NIGHT, YOU WILL  HAVE WIDESPREAD MISSILE OR  DRONE ATTACKS OR SHELLING CLOSE  TO THE FRONT LINE.  WE HEARD THE SIREN HERE.  WE WEREN'T SURE QUITE WHAT IT  MEANT, WE HEARD THAT THERE WERE  RUSSIAN BOMBERS TO THE EAST AND  THERE WERE TWO WAVES OF MISSILE  STRIKES FROM THE EAST AS WELL  AS THE NORTHEAST.  SO WE THEN HEARD THE SOUND OF  AIR DEFENSE SYSTEMS WHICH  CAUSED THE WINDOWS TO RATTLE  AND THAT'S WHEN YOU KNOW THAT  YOU HAVE TO HAD TO THE SHELTER,  THIS TIME AROUND FOR THE FIRST  TIME REALLY SINCE RUSSIA TACTICS OF LAST WINTER, ENERGY  INFRASTRUCTURE HAS BEEN HIT. SO  I THINK THIS WILL BE A CASE OF  DCJC VU FOR MANY UKRAINIANS.  WE DON'T YET KNOW THE FULL  PICTURE OF CASUALTIES, BUT I  THINK WHAT WE ARE LOOKING AT  HERE JUST BY THE SUSTAINED  NATURE OF THE RUSSIAN TACTICS  IS RUSSIA IS TRYING TO EXHAUST  UKRAINIAN AIR DEFENSE SYSTEMS  WHERE YOU HAVE A RELATIVELY  CHEAP URANIAN MADE DRONE BEING  TAKEN OUT BY A MUCH MORE  EXPENSIVE WESTERN SUPPLIES  MISSILE.  I THINK SECONDLY RUSSIA IS  CONTINUING TO TRY TO SUPPRESS  THE POPULATION BY FORCING  MILLIONS OF PEOPLE TO TAKE  SHELTER AT UNPREDICTABLE TIMES.  SO SADLY I THINK THIS IS A  CONTINUATION OF WHAT LIFE IS  LIKE IN THE UKRAINE.  NECK THAT BRINGS ME TO WHAT HE  MAY BE ASKING FOR IN THE WEST,  BEFORE WE GET TO THAT, I WOULD  ASK YOU ABOUT A PIECE OF NEWS  THAT UNFOLDED OVERNIGHT,  POLAND'S PRIME MINISTER SAID  THAT HIS COUNTRY WILL NO LONGER  BE SUPPLYING WEAPONS TO UKRAINE  AMIDST A DIPLOMATIC DISPUTE  WITH GRAIN.  THE SEEM TO BE A RATHER BIG  DEAL BECAUSE POLAND IS SECOND  TO THE U.S. REALLY HAS PROBABLY  ONE OF THE MOST GENEROUS ALLIES  TO UKRAINE AND AT THE VERY LEAST , WHEN WE TALK ABOUT PEOPLE  FLEEING UKRAINE, MANY OF THEM  ENDED UP IN POLAND.  WHAT CAUSED THE FRACTURE?  >> IT IS ALL TO DO WITH GRAIN.  WHEN RUSSIA FIRST BLOCKADED  UKRAINIAN PORTS, IT'S ONE OF  THE BIGGEST PRODUCERS AND IT  HAD TO SHIFT SOMEHOW AND EXPORT  IT THROUGH OTHER MEANS.  AND OVERLAND IS ONE OF THEM.  AS A RESULT OF THAT, MANY  EUROPEAN COUNTRIES, YOU MEMBERS  FOUND MARKETS FLOODED WITH  GRAIN WHICH DROVE DOWN PRICES  AND ANGERED LOCAL FARMERS.  SO THERE WAS A BAND BY THE  EUROPEAN COMMISSION, THAT WAS  LIFTED, BUT THREE COUNTRIES  INCLUDING POLAND KEPT THE BAN  IN PLACE.  SO YOU HAD VOLODYMYR ZELENSKY  IN NEW YORK ACCUSING POLAND OF  HELPING RUSSIA AND NOW WE HAVE,  I THINK THE LANGUAGE IS BEEN  TOLD BACK A BIT.  GOOD POLAND ALLUDING TO THE  FACT THAT THEY WILL SEE WHAT  HAPPENS IN THE FUTURE WHEN  COMES TO SUPPLYING WEAPONS.  THERE'S BEEN A MORE  CONCILIATORY TONE IN UKRAINE  WHERE WE ARE TOLD THAT ANOTHER  DEAL HAS BEEN FLESHED OUT WITH  SLOVAKIA, ANOTHER COUNTRY  BANNING UKRAINIAN IMPORTS WHERE  THEY WILL USE A LICENSING  SYSTEM.  SO I WOULD NOT BE SURPRISED IF  THIS ISN'T RESOLVED WITH  POLAND.  BECAUSE THESE ARE TWO BIG  ALLIES WITH DEEP HISTORICAL  TIES.  THERE'S ALSO ELECTIONS IN  POLAND NEXT MONTH.  I SUSPECT THERE'S POLITICS AND  PLAY AS WELL.  IT |||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||>> A SOURCE OF THIS WAR IS >> A SOURCE OF THIS WAR IS RUSSIA, BUT THIS HAS CHANGED NOTHING FOR RUSSIA IN TH UNITED NATIONS HOWEVER, THESE ARE THE SITUATIONS THAT HAVE CHANGED EVERYTHING FOR THE U.N.. WE SHOULD RECOGNIZE THAT THE WENT FINDS ITSELF IN A DEADLOC ON MATTERS OF AGGRESSION >> TODAY, IN THE UNITED NATION SECURITY COUNCIL MEETING UKRAINIAN PRESIDENT VOLODYMY ZELENSKYY DENOUNCED RUSSIA AS TERRORIST STATE WHILE SITTIN ACROSS FROM THE RUSSIA AMBASSADOR WHO IS SEEN SCROLLING THROUGH HIS PHONE AS ZELENSKYY SPOKE. RUSSIA'S FOREIGN MINISTE SERGEI LAVROV LEFT THE ROO EVEN BEFORE THE REMARKS BEGAN. ZELENSKYY ALSO CALLED OUT TH U.N. FOR ITS INABILITY T MEANINGFULLY CURB RUSSIA'S AGGRESSION AND ITS FIRST IN-PERSO APPEARANCE AT THE GENERA ASSEMBLY SINCE RUSSIA INVADE HIS COUNTRY, UKRAINIAN PRESIDENT HAS HAD TO WALK FINE LINE, RENDERING CRITICISM WHILE SEEKING MORE AID FRO ALLIES WHO FACE INCREASING DOMESTIC PRESSURE TO SEND AI COMMITMENTS. SOME COUNTRIES ARE ACTUALL FINDING WAYS TO WORK AROUN DOMESTIC POLITICAL PRESSURE TO GET UKRAINE TO HELP ITS ASKING FOR. JOINING US NOW IS AMBASSADOR WILLIAM TAYLOR, FORMER U.S ENVOY TO UKRAINE AMBASSADOR TAYLOR, THANK YOU FOR BEING HERE TONIGHT GREATLY APPRECIATED. LET ME START WITH THIS INTERESTING REPORT WE LEARNE ABOUT, THAT THE U.S. - IT'S FROM THE INTERCEPT, AND IT'S THAT THE U.S. IS SECRETLY -- HAS SECRETLY BROKERED A DEAL WITH PAKISTAN TO PROVIDE WEAPONS FOR UKRAINE IN EXCHANG FOR AN URGENTLY NEEDED BAILOUT FROM THE INTERNATIONAL MONETAR FUND EARLIER THIS YEAR LET ME GET YOUR REACTIONS TO THIS REPORTING, AND THIS PRACTICE >> SO, AYMAN, THE U.S. GOVERNMENT, THE PENTAGON, TH STATE DEPARTMENT AS WELL, THEY HAVE BEEN SEARCHING FOR WEAPON AND AMMUNITION, THE RIGHT KIND OF AMMUNITION THAT UKRAINIAN COULD USE ALL OVER THE WORLD AND THEY HAVE GONE TO GREA LENGTHS TO IDENTIFY SOME NATIONS DON'T WANT TO SEND THEIR WEAPONS OR AMMUNITIO DIRECTLY TO UKRAINE. THEY ARE WILLING TO SEND IT TO US, THE UNITED STATES. WE HAVE GONE TO GREAT LENGTH TO FIND THIS FOR UKRAINIANS AS YOU'VE BEEN REPORTING. UKRAINIANS ARE GOING THROUGH THE AMMUNITION VERY HEAVILY, VERY QUICKLY THERE ARE A LOT OF NATIONS OUT THERE THAT CAN DO THIS IT'S NOT SURPRISING THAT WE AR DOING EVERYTHING WE CAN TO COM UP WITH MORE WEAPONS, MORE AMMUNITION, TOP TH UKRAINIANS IN THE FIGHT, FEL OUT THEM TO PUSH THE RUSSIAN OUT OF THEIR COUNTRY THAT IS THE ONLY THING THEREAFTER WE COULD HELP THEM DO THAT B PROVIDING THE WEAPONS BOTH FRO OUR STOCKS, OUR MANUFACTURERS, AS WELL AS THOSE AROUND TH WORLD. >> YOU CERTAINLY KNOW TH RELATIONSHIP PAKISTAN HAS WA INDIA. I'M CURIOUS TO GET YOU THOUGHTS OF THAT COMPLICATES THINGS INDIA HAS TAKEN A NEUTRA STANCE IN RUSSIA'S CONFLIC WITH UKRAINE ACCORDING TO THE INTERCEPT REPORTING, PAKISTAN, AS YO MENTIONED, IS NOT SENDING ARMS TO UKRAINE DO YOU SEE THIS AS A POTENTIAL FOR TENSION GIVEN IN INDIA AND PAKISTAN'S COMPLICATED HISTORY THAT THEY ARE NOW PERCEIVED IN THE RUSSIAN UKRAINE OR TO BE O DIFFERENT SIDES? >> YOU'RE RIGHT, AYMAN IT'S THE CASE THAT THE INDIANS HAVE TRIED TO STAY NEUTRAL I THIS, AND HAVE TAKEN ADVANTAGE OF THE LOW-COST OIL AND GAS TH RUSSIANS HAVE HAD TO OFFER BECAUSE OF THE PRICE CAP THE INDIANS HAVE BEEN LOOKIN TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THAT. PAKISTANIS AND INDIANS, THEY'V GOT A ROUGH RELATIONSHIP THEY'VE GOT A TENS RELATIONSHIP ALL ALONG I DON'T THINK THE PAKISTANIS PROVIDING WEAPONS OR AMMUNITIO TO THE UKRAINIANS IS GOING T AFFECT THAT RELATIONSHIP THE INDIANS HAVE NOT BEE AGGRESSIVELY SUPPORTING TH RUSSIANS, AND PAKISTANIS HAV BEEN SUPPORTIVE OF THE UKRAINIANS >> UKRAINE'S GRAIN, AS YOU MENTIONED, HAS BEEN VERY EXPENSIVE BECAUSE OF RUSSIA' BLOCKADE AND BLOCKADE OF KYIV'S EXPORTS POLAND IS ONE OF THE UKRAINIAN ALLIES BANNING THE IMPORT OF THAT GRAIN, CAUSIN CONSIDERABLE STRAIN ON TIE WITH KYIV. DO YOU THINK THIS RIFT COULD CAUSE POLAND DO YOU BACK OUT O HELPING UKRAINE, OR IS IT RARE AND SINGULAR DISPLAY OF DIVISION BETWEEN KEEP AND IT EUROPEAN ALLIES? >> IT'S MORE THE LATTER, AYMAN IT'S A RARE DISPLAY, AND THERE ARE, AS WE KNOW, POLITICS IN ALL THINGS THE POLLS HAVE AN ELECTION COMING UP, FARMERS ARE A IMPORTANT CONSTITUENCY, AS THE ARE EVERYWHERE THERE IS REALLY AN INTENT OF PART OF THE POLISH GOVERNMEN TO BE SEEN DEFENDING THE FARMERS. AT THE SAME TIME, THEY ARE AMONG THE STRONGEST SUPPORTERS OF UKRAINE, AND CONTINUE TO BE THE STRONGEST AMONG TH STRONGEST SUPPORTERS OF UKRAINE, BOTH ON WEAPONS, ON TAKING I REFUGEES, AND A RANGE OF ISSUE THAT HAVE BEEN HELPFUL T UKRAINE'S, AND THEY'RE NOT BACKING OFF OF THAT. THERE ARE POLITICS, AND THER ARE ISSUES THAT THEY HAVE TO D THINGS THAT THEY HAVE TO SAY A ELECTION APPROACHES, BUT I DON'T THINK THIS IS A SIGN OF RIFT BETWEEN POLAND AN UKRAINE. >> LET ME, IF I CAN, WHY DID THE CONVERSATION DO SOME OTHER NEWS TAKING PLACE AT THE U.N.. YOU HAD THE SAUDI CROWN PRINCE SITTING DOWN WITH FOX NEWS I AN INTERVIEW THAT AIRED EARLIE TODAY. WHAT DO YOU MAKE OF TH REHABILITATION OF SAUDI ARABIA AND THE COME BACK OF THE CROWN PRINCE THAT HE IS MAKING ALMOS FIVE YEARS TO THE DAY THAT JAMAL KHASHOGGI WAS KILLED I TURKEY >> NO ONE SHOULD FORGET THAT NO ONE SHOULD FORGET HOW THA PERSON DIED. NO ONE WILL. THAT SAID, AS WE'VE SEEN LEADERS FROM AROUND THE WORL HAVE DEALT WITH OTHER LEADER FROM AROUND THE WORLD, SOMETIMES YOU HAVE TO DEAL WIT PEOPLE YOU DON'T AGREE WITH, DON'T RESPECT, BUT THERE ARE ISSUES YOU HAVE TO INTERAC WITH PEOPLE. THIS IS WHAT IS HAPPENING WITH THE SAUDIS|||On August 23, 1939, Hitler and Stalin entered into a secret pact. 
Its goal was to destroy Poland. Nobody thought the war and its effects 
would last a half a century for Poland. First Germany attacks, 
then Soviet Russia. We don't give up, despite being left on our own. We create an underground state, 
complete with a government, an army, schools and courts. We suffer two occupations. The Germans murder millions of Polish civilians. The Soviets deport Poles 
in cattle cars to gulags in the East; they shoot over 20,000 officers 
during the Katyn Massacre, and hundreds of thousands of Poles are forced into slave labor... 
in the inhuman lands of the Soviet Union. Our army is reborn, moving West, where our soldiers 
are already fighting alongside the Allies. We conquer Monte Cassino. Our fighters wreak havoc 
and fear by air, too. The Germans call us "Black Devils", 
as we crush their resistance. Paratroopers make their way to occupied Poland to support the underground state, 
while our counterintelligence acquires secret plans of the enemy. There are Poles who save Jews, 
despite the threat of the death penalty. We create resistance movements 
even within the German concentration camps. We are the first to alert the World about the Holocaust, 
though politics appear to be more important than human lives - and nobody listens to us. Polish Jews fight the Germans in the Warsaw ghetto, 
without even a chance for success. Our nation comes up from the underground, and fights in the Warsaw Uprising. We break the German Enigma code, 
saving millions of lives... But in exchange for all that we do, 
we are betrayed - the Free World distances itself from us 
leaving us behind the Iron Curtain. Despite our scars from the war, 
we still resist - the Pope gives us strength; workers' strikes spread throughout Poland. The Communists lose. The Iron Curtain falls. The war is over. We prevail. Because we do not beg for freedom, 
we fight for it.|||This video was made possible by Brilliant. Learn complex topics simply for 20% off by
being one of the first 200 to sign up at brilliant.org/HAI. Hey there kiddos; I need to talk to you about
something. It might be a little awkward, but it’s important
for you to understand. When two countries love each other very much,
or sometimes, hate each other very much, one of the countries will invade the other one. And it’s perfectly natural, and it’s okay,
and it can be great, just so long as they plan for it, because the thing is, if you’re
not careful sometimes invasions can happen by accident. Or at least, that’s what happened in May
of 2020, when Poland accidentally invaded the Czech Republic. This is Poland. It’s called that because it’s the land
of Po, the red Teletubby, who wanders through the country at night, kidnapping babies and
turning them into the sun, and this is… wait, what is this? I know it’s a republic, but which one? Let me check. Oh it’s the Czech Republic. Good thing I checked. Now, both the Czech Republic and Poland are
part of the Schengen Area, a set of 26 countries in which you can travel freely without border
control or passports. Think of it like Disneyland—once you get
into the park, you can go to any part of it you want: Fantasyland, Tomorrowland, Adventureland,
Monetizing-Nostalgia-land, Cash-Grab-Sequel-Land, Corporate-Consolidation-land, Ruining-Star-Wars-Land,
and Toontown! Who doesn’t love Toontown—it’s a town
full of toons! The point is, anybody can cross from Poland
to the Czech Republic, or the other way around, anytime, anywhere, no questions asked. At least, that’s how things are normally—but
things aren’t normally at all right now. I don’t know if you heard, but there’s
some virus going around called something like Coronovinrus… wait no…coronavusus… no…Corbin
Blue-ness… uh …that’s not it… wear-a-mask-you-selfish-morons-virus? Yeah that last one sounds right. Anyway, because of that, countries have started
to act on a provision of the Schengen Borders Code that allows member states to temporarily
close their borders, “in the event that a serious threat to public policy or internal
security had been established.” Now I’m not sure how it’s going to help
to close their Borders; I mean Borders went bankrupt in 2011 and to my knowledge all the
stores are already closed—they probably should have shut the Barnes and Nobles—but
the point is that they can. A border closing can be enacted by an individual
nation, and cannot be vetoed by the European Commission, though the Commission does have
the ability to issue an opinion on it, which does nothing, but people always feel better
when they get to voice their opinion, even if it won’t change anything. Speaking of which, leave a comment down below
with your opinion on an Israel-Palestine two-state solution! Since COVID hit, a lot of EU nations have
exercised their authority to close borders, including Poland and the Czech Republic. This meant Poland had to start doing something
they haven’t historically been very good at: protect their borders from invasion. So, they stationed soldiers at the border,
including here, in Pielgrzymow, a Polish border town, but there’s where the problem came:
every building in Pielgrzymow is in Poland, except for this church, which is in the Czech
Republic… and also this house, for whatever reason. But the Polish soldiers were apparently too
busy doing whatever Polish people do—pole dancing, polishing, pol-ates, who knows—to
realize that, so soldiers had stationed themselves at the church thinking it was the furthest
point of the border in Poland. When Czech people came to their church, in
the Czech Republic, the Polish soldiers stopped them and they were like “hey you can’t
come in here, this is Poland.” Then the Czech people were like “no it’s
not.” And then the Polish people were like “yeah
it is, and also by the way, get out of here.” Which meant that the Polish military was blocking
citizens of the Czech Republic from entering a part of the Czech Republic, and when that
happens, it’s usually called an invasion, and it’s what political scientists refer
to as “kind of a big deal.” Eventually, word got back to the Czech Republic
that they had been invaded, and so then they went to the Pols and were like, “hey uh….
did you invade us” and the Polish people were like “I don’t think so, but let me
check.” And then they checked and the check showed
they’d invaded the Czechs, basically putting them in a diplomatic checkmate. Ultimately, though, things turned out fine—the
Poles said it was an accident, the Czechs believed them, and after a bunch of fancy
official statements smoothing the whole thing out, things went back to as normal as things
can be in 2020. Believe it or not, this wasn’t even the
first time a country has accidentally invaded another country. Back in 2010, a Nicaraguan official noticed
a Costa Rican flag flying over here, across the San Juan River in the Isla Potillos, which
made him very angry, not only because the Costa Rican flag has an insignia with writing
in the middle of it, which is a terrible flag design, but also because he was pretty sure
that that land belonged to Nicaragua. Just to be certain, he opened up Google Maps
to check, and sure enough, the Costa Rican flag was in Nicaragua, and so he and 50 of
his troops crossed the river, took down the flag, and stationed themselves there. Now normally when Google Maps is wrong, it
means I arrive late to my meeting of YouTubers who secretly fix the price of interesting
factoids—no big deal, I’m just late—but for the Nicaraguans, Google Maps’ mistake
meant they had just invaded Costa Rica by accident. Ultimately, to avoid war, both Google and
the Nicaraguan government had to issue an apology, and the mistakes of big tech companies
went on to never stoke global conflict ever again. If you want to work for one of those big global
tech companies, or if you just want to learn how to code because it’s a super useful
skill, you should check out Brilliant, the problem-solving based website and app that
helps you achieve your goals in STEM learning. Learning new stuff can be hard, which is why
Brilliant breaks down complex topics into easy-to-follow, bite-sized chunks that’ll
engage you with storytelling, coding, interactive challenges, and problems to solve. They’ve got a super wide range of courses,
so whether you’re hoping to brush up on geometry, build neural networks, write algorithms,
learn a new coding language, understand machine learning, or something else, Brilliant’s
got you covered. Go to brilliant.org/HAI to sign up for free,
plus, the first 200 to sign up will get 20% off their annual membership.|||Far from the hustle and bustle of the city explore a natural wilderness stunning landscapes majestic forests and pristine National Parks Endless sandy beaches and thousands of lakes Come to cities rich in history hear about amazing legends discover the flavors of traditional cuisine Experience a new adventure! Fall in love with the Great Outdoors...|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Thank you for the meal -Fighting
-Let's go [Members on the street in Poland] We're so... Move over a little Our clothes go well with the colors here -Huh?
-I mean... -Oh, here?
-With the colors of Europe -We dressed up like that
-Yeah, we're like that now
[The Theory of ENHYPEN's Personal Color of Europe] We arrived in Poland yesterday Yeah The colors match us very well Our fashion goes well with the vibe here This is a perfect fit for the European vibe Yeah, totally I'll show you around This kind of vibe [HOONY COMBO
Zooming in on JUNGWON taking a selfie] I don't look good with glasses I used to have hair like NI-KI Doesn't he look Japanese? -NI-KI looks Japanese
-Wow, so cute
[Because he's Japanese (nod)] [Playing with a toy camera] It really has a sentimental vibe Oh, this vibe This is amazing It doesn't record the sound, right? [The result of the toy camera recording] This is amazing It doesn't record the sound, right? Like this, it's not bad -Let me see
-This one This kind of vibe! Like this vibe? -Does it record the sound?
-You have to take it like this I'll show you I'll go behind that tree I think I know what it is Behind the tree Okay, okay -Behind the tree
-Okay I should take it like this -Stay there
-Okay -From the tree
-Okay, okay When I go there Ha ha Ha ha ha -Like this
-I see This is cool Hello The scenery is beautiful here But it's my first time being out like this so it's quite awkward I'll show you the view It looks more beautiful in person but I can't capture it well And I dyed my hair here this morning Does it look good? But it doesn't look good on the camera [Walking on the street] [Ran into Polish mandu] It's a courtesy to take things like this -I missed the timing
-He was a part-time worker I missed the timing This is famous mandu It's a famous food in Poland
[Pierogi] Mandu! I looked it up Is it like gnocchi? Mr. Mandu
[Greeting the mandu across the street] Now, we're in -Poland
-Poland We also dyed our hair Yes The street is beautiful -The weather is so nice here
-That's right I thought it would be cold -It's not as cold as we thought
-It's not that cold It's not that sunny -but I just like the vibe
-Right The weather...
[Supposed to rain, but it cleared up] We bring the sun [Weather fairy ENHYPEN] This is really... It's embarrassing It gives a sentimental vibe
if it shakes a bit [Motion sickness vibe is on] Vibe Shake it for the sentimental vibe [Moving to the next location] [V] [Arrived at the square] Many people are enjoying the culture There's a performance too It would be fun to come here with ENGENE Hello There's a flower shop over there How are you feeling? It's so interesting It really feels refreshing It's really beautiful Very sentimental This stone floor rocks [JAKE approaches to film the busking] It's over The vibe was great just now Why don't we ride it?
[Found a horse carriage] -Wow
-Please give me the camera SUNGHOON should ride it SUNGHOON can ride it -Pardon?
-You can ride it I can only get on and off [SUNGHOON's carriage video] Wow SUNGHOON should ride it We're wandering on the street now This place looks like a vampire castle This place really looks like Hogwarts Hogwarts I think I really saw this in Harry Potter I think I saw this place in Harry Potter Wow, that pigeon is really keen It flew away
as soon as I came closer It's starting to rain It's raining suddenly Huh? Mm I want to go eat soon Yeah I'm very hungry When I'm in Europe
I always want to eat outside I know Under a big umbrella -Like a picnic
-Yes That vibe Let's go eat now Let's eat first Let's go
[Suddenly pouring rain
and became a male lead of a drama, LOL] This is nice
[Went into a store to avoid the rain] What do you think? Is this what
"A bolt out of the blue" means? We were taking a video
and it started to rain suddenly One, two, three -How many do you need?
-They sell umbrellas We can go now, right?
[Bought the most colorful umbrella] The umbrella is so... It's so fluorescent Which road did we take? Which way should we go? It stopped raining We didn't have to buy it If the umbrellas were cooler
we'd look cool but the umbrellas don't match well Yeah, the umbrellas are so... A black umbrella would look good
with this outfit I think it looks good with NI-KI -Yes, it looks good with NI-KI
-It looks good with NI-KI [Glamour is his personal color] Run fast! [HEESEUNG's umbrella turned inside out] There's a person in front That's embarrassing [Met Mandu again in the restaurant] Here I think this is a cafe and restaurant -I heard this is good
-What is this? -Potato
-Is it a baked potato? I want to see a menu... Ma'am [Looking for a ma'am in Poland] "Boiled" means boiled mandu
[JAKE is in charge of the menu] -I like boiled mandu
-This is fried mandu I want boiled mandu One boiled mandu and one fried mandu? -Why don't we order both?
-Let's order both One of each We will get one pork knuckle
[JAKE is also in charge of ordering] -One pork knuckle
-Yeah This one, too? And we'll get one pancake potato -I want to eat bread
-And we'll get one of this -Croquettes?
-Yes -Mixed?
-Yeah, we'll get mixed [NI-KI drinks cola
The others drink a glass of beer] -Fighting
-Let's go -It's good
-What is it? It's so good Wow I can't believe I'm filming a beer vlog Cheers -This is alcohol
-This is alcohol
[Kidding] This is non-alcoholic Thank you
[The food finally arrives] -Be careful, it's very very hot
-Oh my God -Thank you
-Thank you Wow Oh my God -NI-KI
-Yeah? Thank you for the meal It looks good Thank you for the meal It just disappears -Wow
-Plate Wow, what's this? Is it good? Yes -Is it good?
-Try it It looks delicious You try it first [Food taster] The food here is good -It's so good
-Try it [Saying hi to the baby at the next table] Look at me one more time! So cute [Drawing the baby's attention] Everyone The baby is looking at us now
[A baby at the next table] Waah Everyone, we enjoyed our meal Now, we're going back to the hotel Let's get it -Thank you for the food
-Thank you for the food Thank you for the food, good night -Did I say it right?
-All of a sudden? -How do I say "Good night"?
-We're ENHYPEN, bye We enjoyed the meal [Going back to the hotel] Do you want some ice cream? After we come back from the hotel After we come back?
I'm not sure if I can come outside again They sell ice cream over there I want to do this What is it? What do you want to do?
[He really couldn't come back and took a rest] [The next day] Oh my We're at our hotel We were going to go out today but it's raining
so I don't think we can go out We're leaving tomorrow I'll enjoy everything I can at this hotel before leaving here Hello, everyone We're in Poland I was chatting with SUNGHOON last night We ordered room service and ate together So I slept in That's why my face looks a bit puffy It's a little puffy How are you feeling? [Didn't hear] How are you feeling? -Pardon?
-How are you feeling? We can't go outside today It's raining a lot I heard that are a lot of Easter events -Easter egg?
-Yes The streets were so pretty So I wanted to walk around but it's raining The situation is bad outside... I'll take an umbrella later and take a walk alone I do have an umbrella Can't we just look around? We can't catch a cold We should stay healthy We're going to do some sightseeing We were going to stay at the hotel But we'll go out and have fun I'm dizzy It's cold
[It's colder than they thought] It's cold today Is SUNGHOON staying at the hotel? -SUNGHOON will come with us
-It's really cold We were... going to go on a tour outside but it's raining so much -And it's so cold
-It's so cold So I don't think we can go The hotel is beautiful
[Staying inside to stay in good condition
before the MV shoot] So we'll take many videos in the hotel I'm in a padded jacket because it's cold
[JAY came back in a padded jacket] [Going to take a walk alone] -Hello
-Hello It's cold and raining So I came back outside
with my padded jacket I think this sort of thing
has its own charm too to walk on a rainy street in Europe alone with an umbrella I think it's quite romantic I'm going to enjoy the romance But my umbrella is broken How did it break like this? It's so windy I think people here are used to the rain so they wear waterproof clothes and hats instead of using umbrellas I've been in Poland for just a few days But I like the country and the food here So I enjoyed staying here The seasoning of the food was perfect for me And it's so peaceful I feel like I'm in my own neighborhood I'm in the middle of the city but I don't feel suffocated We've arrived
[Members are in a different city for the MV] This is the second hotel we're at
to shoot the music video It's like an English village in Korea Hello Hello We're out for a walk now The view here is so nice Yeah [The three are going on a walk] There's a puppy
[Found a grocery store during the walk] [Looking around the Polish grocery store] Coffee [Picking some items] I should live here There are so many kinds This looks better It's JAKE and JAY JUNGWON! It's amazing here This is it
[Legendary bread aisle] Oh my I already saw them This is really good
[Losing their minds over the delicious-looking bread] This looks yummy too It's pizza bread It's lit Hold on Oreo donut! Donut cookies It's covered with snow It snowed in Donutland Take this too Get a tool
This is an apple pie Doesn't it look good? It looks good [On the way to eat] That's an embarrassing moment Right That's the most embarrassing moment
[Embarrassing moment for dog owners
when their dog barks at another dog] Maeum barks first
even when other dogs don't bark Yellow hair
[Found familiar yellow hair!] Who is that? I can't run [But I'll try to run hard] [Arrived at the restaurant] [with the other members!] [After enjoying the food] [Going to rest for the MV shoot] [The end of the vlog in Poland!]|||(Lovesick girls) (Lovesick girls) Endless night Love trapped us in a windowless room (Love) What can we say? Long for love even though it hurts every time (Love) Get hurt and break down, I Don't know what's making me hold on If I leave anyway, I'll hate you in my pained state We can't end it before it's over It's as if we've been waiting for this agony Maybe it's all just for a moment What are we looking for so aimlessly But I don't care, I'll do it over and over I just need you in my life We are the lovеsick girls You can't just end this love on your own We arе the lovesick girls I'm nothing without this pain But we were born to be alone Yeah, we were born to be alone Yeah, we were born to be alone But why we still looking for love? No love letters, no X and O's No love, never, my exes know No diamond rings, that set in stone To the left, better left alone Didn't wanna be a princess, I'm priceless A prince not even on my list Love is a drug that I quit No doctor could help when I'm lovesick Maybe it's all just for a moment What are we looking for so aimlessly? Looking at you with my anxious gaze You're all I need, even if it hurts We are the lovesick girls You can't just end this love on your own We are the lovesick girls I'm nothing without this pain But we were born to be alone Yeah, we were born to be alone Yeah, we were born to be alone But why we still looking for love? Love is slippin' and fallin' Love is killin' your darlin' That fearless thrill returns once the pain subsides Can't hear what you say I'm happy with this pain You pity me, but I pity you more for pitying me We are the lovesick girls You can't just end this love on your own We are the lovesick girls I'm nothing without this pain One, two (Lovesick girls) Everyone eventually leaves (Lovesick girls) I've become numb to crying (Lovesick girls) Hurt over and over again (Lovesick girls) But we're still looking for love|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||What’s up guys! My name is Ryan Shirley and I want to show
you some of my favorite places in the enchanting country of Poland, so here is my Polish Top
10! Poland is home to some of the world’s most
stunning landscapes. From Gdansk’s medieval old town, to the
towering Tatra mountains, Poland has so much to offer. Let's start this video off at the city of
Krakow. This may be one of my favorite cities in Poland. Located in the south of the country, Krakow
was founded all the way back in the 7th century, so you best believe it's full of beautiful
history and architecture! One of the most impressive sights is the Wawel
Royal Castle, it was built during the 14th century and was the first unesco world heritage
site! It features architectural styles from the
medieval, renaissance, and baroque periods! Such a beautiful building. From the castle, you can make the short walk
to the Main square. It dates back to the 13th century and it's
the largest medieval town square in all of Europe which is pretty crazy! It's fascinating to think of all the history
that took place here. In the corner of the square is Saint Mary’s
Basilica which was built back in the 14th century and is a perfect example of Polish
Gothic Architecture. Another interesting feature of Krakow is the
Kosciuszko Mound. It's an artificial hill that was modeled after
other prehistoric mounds in the city. It was built in 1823 to commemorate the national
hero named Tadeusz Kosciuszko. The mound is 112 feet high, and there's a
serpentine path that takes you to the top to enjoy panoramic views of Krakow and the
vistula river! What a beautiful city. After Krakow, we're going to head to the Tatra
mountains. Located about a two hours drive from Krakow,
the Tatras are a stunning mountain range that straddles the polish and slovakian border. The best town to access the tatras is Zakopane. Located right at the base of the mountains,
Zakopane is the starting place for your mountain adventures. During the winter time, Zakopane is an ideal
place to go skiing, and in the summer months it's a prime place to start your hike into
the mountains. One of the most impressive places in the tatras
is the Morskie Oko lake. To get there, you can take a bus from Zakopane
to the base of the Morskie Oko hike and then make the 16 kilometer round trip hike to the
scenic lake! What a phenomenal view! The Tatras are the smallest alpine mountain
range in Europe and are home to plenty of wildlife such as the Eurasian brown bear. I just love how the tatras look, they just
have such a unique jagged look to them! If you're into WW2 history, you can visit
the Memorial of Auschwitz Concentration camps. Located about a hours drive from Krakow, Auschwitz
is infamously known to be one of the most horrific Nazi concentration camps. Over 1.1 million people died here. One of my favorite books I’ve ever read
is called “The Auschwitz escape” and it tells the story of how two prisoners made
the daring escape from the concentration camp. After, we're going to head up to northern
Poland to visit Sopot. Located right on the Baltic Sea, Sopot was
established in the 8th century and grew as a commercial trade post & Fishing village. Over the centuries Sopot faced adversity as
it was abandoned, burned and rebuilt. But in the early 19th century, Sopot started
to gain popularity thanks to its spa and public baths and it quickly became a holiday resort
town. Today Sopot is a thriving tourist attraction. While you're there you can take a walk on
Europe's longest wooden pier, or you can enjoy the swans and endless sandy coastline. Now I understand what it's nicknamed the Polish
riviera. After sopot, we're going to head over to neighboring
Gdansk! Located just a 15 minutes drive from Sopot,
Gdansk is one of Poland's oldest cities with a fascinating history with periods of polish,
prussian, and german rule. The earliest mention of Gdansk was in 997,
and during the middle ages, Gdansk grew as an important seaport and shipbuilding town! It rose to be the wealthiest and largest city
in Poland until Warsaw’s rapid growth in the 18th century. Sadly, a majority of Gdansk was destroyed
during world war 2! Today Gdansk is one of Poland’s most beautiful
cities! I can’t believe how beautiful its Old Town
is, it's full of perfectly placed houses that seem to go on forever! I love how the canal runs right along the
old town, its full ships and gives the city such fun vibes. While you're there, you can explore the streets
of the old town or take a walk down the canal, what an incredible city! Just an hour's drive from Gdansk is the Malbork
Castle. Located in the town of Malbork on the river
nougat, this castle is the largest in the world by land area! It was built in the 13th century by the Teutonic
Knights, who were German Catholic Crusaders. As the number of knights grew, so did the
castle, which encloses an area of 52 acres! It’s just crazy to think people were able
to build such buildings back then! Like Gdansk, more than half of Malbork castle
was destroyed during WW2. Built thankfully it has been rebuilt to its
former glory! After Malbork Castle, were going to head over
to the Masurian Lake District. Located in north eastern Poland, this lake
district is the most visited in all of central Europe and is home to over 2000 lakes. There’s so many beautiful towns to explore
in the region and it's a prime place to go sailing and other water activities. I can’t think of a better place to go on
a hot polish summer day. Aside from the lakes, the area is full of
beautiful forests perfect for hiking and exploring. Mazury is definitely a hidden gem that deserves
a visit! Another scenic place for nature lovers is
the Pieniny National Park. Located in both southern Poland and northern
Slovakia, Pieniny is one of the smallest and oldest national parks in all of poland. I think this is such a beautiful area, the
river runs right through it and acts as a border between Poland and slovakia. Its home to many animal species, such as the
eurasian lynx. One of my favorite features of the mountains
is the Three Crowns. It's made up of 5 sharp limestone peaks that
create quite the sight. Another beautiful nearby spot is the Niedzica
(Nie deetza) Castle. This 14th century castle is located just a
few minutes away from the park! What a beautiful area. After, we're going to head over to the beautiful
city of Wroclaw. It's such a tricky pronunciation. Located in western Poland about a three hours
drive from Krakow, Wroclaw is such a charming historical city! Its home to one of the most beautiful market
squares in Europe, its lined with elegant townhouses and cobblestone streets. Wroclaw also has one of the most beautiful
cathedrals in Poland, it was originally built in 1272, but has been damaged and rebuilt
several times throughout the centuries. I love its double spires! It's impossible to beat Europe’s churches. For our final destination, we're going to
head to Warsaw. Located on the Vistula River in East Central
Poland, Warsaw is the capital and largest city in the country. Warsaw began to grow in the 16th century when
the capital was moved there from Krakow. It was called the Paris of the North, but
Warsaw was damaged extensively during world war 2 with over 85% of its buildings in ruins. Today its bustling capital with a population
of 1.8 million! One of my favorite buildings is the Palace
of culture and Science, at 778 feet tall it's 5th tallest building in the EU! The crowning feature of the city is Warsaw’s
Old town. It was established during the 13th century
and is full of history and medieval architecture. Like the main part of the city, the old town
was almost completely destroyed during world war 2, but it was miraculously restored and
was made a world heritage site in 1980. When you’re there you can explore the square
and marvel at all the history that took place in this medieval old town. Well that is it for my Poland Top 10! Let me know where your favorite place is in
Poland in the comments below! I also started a relaxation channel where
I post hour-long films with calming music to bring some peace and nature in your life. I'll be doing a film in Poland soon. You can find me on tiktok and instagram at
shirley.films. It's Ryan and we will see you later!|||We're the  European country of Poland! made up of 16 Voivodeship's you will understand The European country
of Poland We’ll also list our capitals
With the Kids Learning tube
band I am Wielkopolska
A Polish Voivodeship
Poznań is my capital
I hope you pronounce this Kujawsko-Pomorskie
That is my name
Bydgoszcz and Toruń
Are my capital names Województwo Małopolskie
That is who I am
Kraków is my capital 
So you understand We’re the European country
of Poland 
Made up of 16 Voivodeship’s
You will understand The European country
of Poland
We’ll also list our capitals
With the Kids Learning tube
band I am łódzkie
A Polish Voivodeship
łódzkie is my capital
Thank you for learning this Dolnośląskie’s my name
Voivodeship in the Southwest
Wrocław is my capital
Come visit it’s the best Lubelskie’s my name
I’m located in the East
Lublin is my capital
Come visit me please I am Lubuskie
Located in the west
Gorzów Wielkopolski 
and Zielona Góra rest We’re the European country
of Poland 
Made up of 16 Voivodeship’s
You will understand The European country
of Poland
We’ll also list our capitals
With the Kids Learning tube
band Mazowieckie 
That is my name
I house the capital of Poland
WARSAW holds that fame Opolskie my name 
That’s what you’re here to see
Opole is my capital
It’s where you could be Podlaskie is here
I’ll tell you something too
Białystok’s my capital
It’s nice to see you Pomorskie is my name
Located in the North
Gdańsk is my capital
for what it is worth We’re the European country
of Poland 
Made up of 16 Voivodeship’s
You will understand The European country
of Poland
We’ll also list our capitals
With the Kids Learning tube
band I am Śląskie
In the South of Poland
Katowice is my capital
Where have you been Podkarpackie
That is what I’m called
Rzeszów is my capital
Don’t be appalled Świętokrzyskie
Yes I am land locked
My capitals Kielce
I’m glad that we talked Warmińsko-Mazurskie
Yes that is my name
Olsztyn is my capital
Yes that’s what i claim Zachodniopomorskie
That is who I am
My capital is Szczecin
Before this song began I AM POLAND IN EASTERN EUROPE
I HAVE A CAPITAL NAMED WARSAW SO KEEP THE LEARNING UP We’re the European country
of Poland 
Made up of 16 Voivodeship’s
You will understand The European country
of Poland
We’ll also list our capitals
With the Kids Learning tube
band MUSIC THINKS FOR WATCHING KIDS LEARNING TUBE PLEASE SUBSCRIBED TO MY CHANNEL HERE PURCHASE MY MUSIC ON ITUNES HERE TO SUPORT MY CHANNEL AND FOLLOWS US ON FACEBOOK, TWITTER, AND INSTAGRAM BY CLICKING THE LINKS ON THE BANNER ABOVE [MUSIC STOPS]|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||in today's video Polish food polish street food 
we're on our way to Crawley now so let's go   check out the street food what they got in Crawley 
polish street food we're going to get some hot dog polish Hot Dogs I'm looking forward to it 
Liz Irie is a vegetarian so she'll probably just   wait around for me while I try this Polish food 
let's go to Crawley all right we're going to have   a Polish hot dog we're turning left now I think 
we've arrived it's in this retail car park in this   Center here see all right so let's see right 
Y at the roundabout polish Hot Dog where are   you good po G CPS all right so we're in the 
car par now and the plan is to look for the   Polish hot dogs where are they I found out where 
it is it's over there in that direction polish   Hot Dogs looking forward to it all right let's go 
check this place out we're now in the car park in   Crawley polish hot dog I'm looking forward to it 
gorat CPS let's go right so it's a little wooden   Hut here in like the middle of of this retail car 
park all right let's go and get the the Polish hot dog um Mar gorat CPS hot dog polish Hot Dog yes 
ah can I have one please pressure jenu polish Hot   Dog today super jenu oh and timbar yes timbar 
is a good polish drink as well right yes of   course aha polish timbar oh you have perroy 
yes o wow that's interesting M smells like   Poland here yeah I love perogi I was in Poland 
and I was invited to um a perogi company and I   made videos with them they had they let me try 
the Polish perogies as well Polish people are   really welcoming that's my experience in Poland 
they're really nice Polish people Polish people   is very nice yeah and the food and the beer 
yes the beer yes Luby tisia oh yeah and soit   soit yeah very strong alcohol oh it's it's 
kind of strong it tastes a bit sweet yeah oh   wow what Peis do you make here with potato and 
R okay interesting and what else do you have the   dumplings polish Hot Dog zapy kka zapy kka wow 
zapy kka as well remember you guys we had zapi   kka in kov and we also had it in two yeah so 
this is the front of the the Polish restaurant   in this retail car park here in Crawley so now 
obat what's for dinner polish street food hey   super so I will get the timb for user okay and 
the Polish hot dog please okay today I will open   the timb and read the label my subscribers always 
say when you open the timb you need to read this yes thank you you're welcome whereabouts are you 
from in Poland if you don't mind me asking posan   posan yes ah I will go there I would like to go 
there yeah um I usually go to villages in Poland   and the towns I've been to krov I've been to CIT 
oh Mance I've been to a few places in Poland yeah   to remember off the top of my head it's quite 
hard but I usually document and travel around in Poland so here's the Polish menu what 
they have zapi kka polish Burger polish   Hot Dog o wow and this looks delicious 
as well wow made by a lovely polish lady right so I'm looking to looking forward to 
trying this and the opening times are here   11:00 till 7:00 wow you open till late wow 
so that's good if anybody's finishing work   you know when you coming through and you pass in 
this area they close at 7:00 so you are more than   likely be able to get yourself some Polish food 
cuz they close at 7:00 right so we got a timark   is this flavor any good best flavor this one 
yes okay so this flavor is good oh all right   and you're making the onions now right yes and 
sausage wow that's a big sausage yes big Polish sausage what is the name of this sausage it's 
gasa gasa ooh super I speak Polish I speak   Polish tech tech tech [Music] [ __ ] how long 
you living in England uh 12 years wow and you   speaking good English as well I'm not speaking 
English no after a few beers Polish beers maybe   okay super and you local you live in local in 
this I you C cley oh nice area right cool is   there is is there any other Polish restaurants 
in this so just this is the only polish street   food here oh wow do you get a lot of Polish 
people com in here uh not really not really   ahuh see H oh something interesting to know 
lot not a lot maybe after this because a lot   of Polish people watch my videos Polish people 
you need to come here and get some Polish food   okay do you have mea civil over oh no I'm sorry 
they don't have meta Cova here oh no I love meta   Cova not yet do you like metova yes oh wow wow 
me and this lady would get along she likes Meda Cova all right let's let's read what 
they have on the the label here on my drink oh no it's not in Polish it 
says it can only get better   but you can translate that for 
me how to say in Polish uh can I see lipi T oh wow it smells really really good 
this polish Hot Dog wow and you have sauce   yes uh mayo and gar wow delicious so I would 
also like to go to timark as well because we   went to Tikki and that's where they brew the 
famous beer polish beer tisia we've already   went to the Polish Brewery but I would like 
to go to timbar because they do this drink as well oh wow nice it's not too sweet and 
it's not too watery you can still taste   the the fruity flavor in the drink 
and the flavor is apple mango and mint delicious well I wonder if 
I don't finish that I will   definitely take away because 
that is a huge sausage roll wow right so I'm just waiting for my 
sausage roll now be really interesting   to see what else they have but I'm really 
wanted to get the Polish sausage roll here   wow this is where we are this is the the 
shop look look at the flavors zappy canka   mushroom they got vegetables ham mushroom 
chicken and mushrooms beef Burg the pric   is they got Burgers here Polish sausage 
so yes it's official I'm having a Polish sausage how long you been working here long time   1 month one month ahuh wow 
so not so long then no no oh okay I like your jumper the Polish jumper 
yeah representing for Poland that's right   where is your favorite place in Poland Poland yeah you don't have favorite place oh I'm prob but okay this is here it's 
my house okay yeah I like I like a lot   of places in Poland especially the 
villages really nice that is nice that's you live alone here or you 
come with family I live with my   son uhhuh okay wow that sausage 
looks like it's going to be real good wow I'm that's loads of onions as well have a   look at that [Music] wow [Music] super 
Polish sausage roll cooked by a Polish lady right so I'm just patiently 
waiting now for my Polish sausage roll oh it looks like it's being prepared 
now oh wow is that a Polish baguette polish   baguette bread yes yes also a Polish baguette 
bread as well we've had plenty of those in Poland right I'd really like to 
find out what these zanka taste   like as well but maybe another time wow old scare Patriot thank you Jen B Jen andj thank you very 
much it looks really delicious wow maybe navos   naos maybe um after I half and after naos 
okay thank you very much all right so here   it is the Polish big Polish hot dog wow Co 
blind me look at that got to do a thumbnail   now the biggest polish Hot Dog I have ever 
seen check it out nicely Dr messed up though   look she put nicely the ketchup on there the 
the mustard loads of onion in there as well   oops I'm blocking the cars hello I'm busy 
here reviewing my Polish sausage roll I'm   like getting in the way of the cars right time 
to dig in and it's smash Neo enjoy that's how   you say Enjoy your food in Polish smash Neo 
SM yeah isn't that right Madam yes all right   here it goes this is a big police I I better 
not drop this all right here it goes wow wo M that is that's a juicy one not going to lie 
the baguette the baguette is not overly crusty   it's really soft the sausage is nice and it's got 
a really nice flavor along with the onions as well   the fried onions is a really good combination 
look at look how big that is that is really big   this lady is definitely going to have some Polish 
people coming here and some other people coming to   order this because she said Polish people don't 
even come here I'm surprised there's no poles in Crawley m oh wow look she can make a very good sausage roll wow M that delicious man I'll see I'll see how 
much I can finish in the cwy car park eating   this polish street food maybe I have 
got food around my mouth but I don't care the food tastes so good 
I don't care food right my mouth M that is banging M well now lift my my drink there on 
the side no one better not drink it wow check it out so it looks like she put the 
the onions at the bottom because I saw her   frying a load of onions they're definitely in 
the bottom and then she put the sausage on the top wow delicious I want to bye enjoy M oh this is really nice m m wow what's the time isn't it lunchtime 
I'm I'm surprised we ain't got about a   100 Polish workmen lining up here 
waiting for their sausage roll m right so we're having a really delicious Polish   sausage roll now and it tastes good 
that's where this rackets coming from M delicious getting busy now here wow m M that delicious so can I have a tissue please thank you w that is absolutely delicious quite disappointed that on the lid why is 
that you guys um sometimes when I open the   timark it has it in Polish writing but inside 
this one has it in English why I don't know [Applause] M can I get the poce delicious all right we have got to take the rest away 
so filling feels like I've at half of it   but I've only had like five bites I'm 
telling you mate this is really really filling okay pressure naos okay you right that was [Music] delicious right you make a 
very good sausage roll thank you want um I'm in the car it's all 
right jle your where to get the best   Polish sausage roll in Crawley now 
you know all right huge humongous   sausage roll and she likes Meda Cova 
but they don't have any what a shame|||Look, there is a bar as well Look, Shah Rukh Khan is standing here I said, he looks like Shah Rukh Khan He said, who is Shah Rukh Khan? You don't know Shah Rukh Khan? Welcome to the Punjabi Wanderers YouTube channel Today we are in Krakow, Poland We are going to Zakopane It will be a long trip She will pick us up and take us around There is a thermal bath as well Today we have with us Yakub Yesterday I was saying Zakopane Then he said, it's Zakopane It's not Zakopane Today we are going to Poland with a Polish guy I found the guy Stay tuned, let's see how the day goes They destroyed the church They set fire on the church It's pretty clean They have around 200 years old Most of the houses But they look pretty new Pretty clean Because the owners They clean those houses twice per year This is our settlement We are sitting in this We are in a wooden village This is a church It has some history It's very old How old? Around 500 years old There are a lot of old wooden houses They are cleaned twice per year One on Easter And one on a holiday in June We saw Easter in Ethiopia It's pretty clean Let me show you These houses are on this street Let's walk around In this village This is a UNESCO World Heritage Site Poland Around 1600 It was captured by Germany, Austria Russia This part was near Austria When these houses were built See the scene here These are locals People still live here There is a car See this Such a beautiful house See this People still live here 400 years old houses People still live here Guru, what do you think of these houses? What I think of these houses? Would you live here? I would not live here People are coming People are coming You would not live here But they are nice The guide told us There is no nail There is no nail They just fit They just fit There is no nail I think they are beautiful And also romantic If you live here As an outsider As an outsider Where do you come from? Which country? Go back to your home country The church was destroyed The church was destroyed But they rebuilt it The church is not that old The church is not that old It's time to go to the next stop This is what happens in tours They say you have 15 minutes You can go around We are going back The next stop is Zakopane Is Zakopane more beautiful than this? Is Zakopane more beautiful than this? It's very different All the wooden houses But Zakopane is the main place Where every Polish guy goes On vacation to go to the mountains They all go to Zakopane So it's not like wooden houses in Zakopane? It's like concrete houses It's like concrete houses Like a city Like a city I hope we don't miss our bus I hope we don't miss our bus Let's get the bus Our next stop is Sheffield hut Sheffield hut Sheffield hut Sheffield hut Sheffield hut Sheffield hut Sheffield hut Sheffield hut Sheffield hut Sheffield hut Sheffield hut Sheffield hut Sheffield hut Sheffield hut Sheffield hut Sheffield hut Sheffield hut Sheffield hut Sheffield hut Sheffield hut Let's try something else Hey guys, please Grab a shot of vodka We say cheers We say Na zdorovie We go through So this is our Polish Vodka I forgot the name of the fruit The cheese is quite rubbery How should I say It's good Soya The Wang is trying to get me drunk again Like yesterday I just recovered yesterday And now he is handing me over a drink It's free Never say no to a free drink Na zdorovie It's a very beautiful place The whole rural area Is very beautiful It's very clean This vodka Was very light And the toilet I was told that it's a bad toilet But it was a good one It was clean Rest Let's go to the next stop We will go to Zakopane So we are in Zakopane And first of all We were told that There is a cable car The cable car goes up the mountains There are Tatra mountains here In Slovakia And it's very close to the border Between Slovakia and Poland This is a very famous city It's called Winter Capital of Poland And now we are going In this cable car We will go up the mountains And we will see beautiful views So the ticket Was included in the tour Funicular We will see the views From the cable car We will eat We will explore the city And then we will go to the thermal baths So you finally gonna get a shower After 4 days Stinking Back in the days I used to come here every time With my family and my mom Back in the days when I was a small kid In 2005 They would actually even sell puppies On the street Just in boxes As a kid I never got it But finally they made it illegal To sell puppies In India you can still buy them On the streets Good reason to come to India So this is Their market You were saying something? So this is your 5th time, 6th time Minimum So this is a very famous place For the people of Poland Just like your Shimla, Manali You can count it So this is Shahrukh Khan From Mohabateh You look like Shahrukh Khan From Mohabateh I told him You look like Shahrukh Khan He said who is Shahrukh Khan You don't know Shahrukh Khan You are the first guy I have met In my entire travels Who doesn't know Shahrukh Khan Let's get acquainted Let's get acquainted Let's get acquainted Let's go You got his number So in summary This is Shimla Everyone comes here For picnics And Some people come for selfies It's not that exciting But it's beautiful It's not that exciting But it's beautiful It's like Europe Switzerland, Italy Mountains beautiful so we are down this ticket was 25 Lote means 500 Rupees we got it for free it was included in the tour otherwise if you come by yourself it will cost you 500 Rupees there are some beautiful views but what can you do 15 to 20 minutes you can't stay there for food we will cut the potato and fry it it costs 160 Rupees and the spices our potatoes are getting ready it costs 180 Rupees is it a potato? it's good this is the main street what's the name of the street? Krupuvki Krupuvki just like we went to St. Moritz I forgot the name of the mountain I think it's Zermatt it looks like Zermatt just like we went to Zermatt just like we went to Zermatt people come here for skiing in winter in summer they come for sightseeing it's a beautiful city I will definitely recommend if you come to Krakow come here, it's very beautiful their horses are so big we don't have such big horses we came here for food I don't know what I ordered I thought it was pudding and apple I thought it would be sweet maybe it's quinoa I don't know you got some sweet stuff I got a cheesecake it's a fancy place it's expensive but we had to eat something there is a house here it's upside down it's 8 minutes away it's in this city let's see I don't know we will go inside it's not a big fight it's Poland, not Switzerland we can afford look how beautiful it is it's so beautiful color, cleanliness it's very beautiful take this you can't see it well cherry blossom flowers it's visible it's pink it's also like that it's not visible but it's cherry blossoms that's our house it's upside down but I think it's a private house we are not allowed inside you can see it from outside maybe you are not allowed to go inside let's see it's a fence pink cherry blossoms it's open let's see if we get a ticket definitely we get a ticket we have timings there is a card we got a ticket it's 800 rupees for two people 400 rupees for one person to go inside let's see what's inside it's upside down like an artist it's nice watch out I am falling to the side slope even the chair is upside down it's upside down you are so crooked exactly I am falling this way I am making the camera crooked I am going to the side even the mouse is upside down seriously it's nice nice bro, there is a girl for you here waiting it's a toilet toilet seat, does it open? no, it doesn't open I have kept my shoes up seriously we are feeling dizzy I feel like I am going to fall it's fun it's small 400 rupees is little more let's click some photos it's like it feels like going it's a fun place it's fun to go inside it's little expensive it's 400 rupees for a small house but since there were only two of us we enjoyed a lot took a lot of photos I will recommend this place we are at Thermal Bath it's entry fee is included we paid 50 euros for the tour everything is included let's go inside we don't have to be naked I have brought a towel let's go inside there is a big system they have given us a wrist band let me show you scan it you can see my number my number is 1441 scan it it opened it's like a maze I don't know where I am I don't understand are you saying this? this is what does it say? this is for ladies I think you have to go through the showers to go to the these are the thermal pools kids, old people, boys and girls are inside there are some outside let's see this is the kids section there is a normal pool we have to go down it's on the 0th floor we came up by mistake it's bubbling I don't know what this place is I don't understand let's go inside we can go down we are going to have fun he said this is the best floor minus 1 there are pools like this there is only hot water there is no sulphur there are other pools with sulphur I have to come with this guy there is a scene here when people are inside the pool you can't make videos you are making their video some people came out I made a video it's very awkward everyone is almost naked it's very weird to make a video with them I will make less videos inside we came out of this there is another one I think it has sulphur let's see I don't think there is any sulphur in it no there is a water park outside this place is good the coolest thing is there is a bar you can have drinks ice cream when you get this you can pay for it let's have a beer it's a nice place outside pool is good inside was bad I didn't like it outside pool was good if you see the views and hot water it was good you can chill I didn't like the pool inside they were not even hot they were just warm if you come here just for thermal bath don't come here Zakopane was good with funicular the house was good but not for thermal bath you can skip it but go to Zakopane see you in the next vlog see you in the next one good bye for now So this is my reason that I got a good ice cream and I didn't get a good ice cream I'll see you next time, good bye You|||SPEAKING TO CONGRESS, INSPIRING THE LEADERSHIP IN THE UK TO CONTINUE ITS SUPPORT NOW AS WE COME UP ON THE ONE-YEAR ANNIVERSARY OF RUSSIA'S INVASION. >> THE WAR HAS ENTERED A NEW STAGE IN RECENT WEEKS, AS DOZENS OF TANKS WERE PLEDGED BY EUROPEAN ALLIES TO AID IN UKRAINE'S DEFENSE. WITH SOME ALREADY ON THEIR WAY. LEADING THE CHARGE IN THAT EFFORT IS POLAND, WHICH IN LATE JANUARY STRESSED THAT EVEN IF OTHER COUNTRIES DID NOT WANT TO SEND TANKS, POLAND WOULD. JOINING US NOW, POLISH CHIEF OF DEFENSE, GENERAL RAY. POLAND HAS STEPPED UP IMMEDIATELY WITH NO DEBATE IN SO MANY WAYS. TELL US ABOUT YOUR VISIT HERE AND YOUR MESSAGE TO AMERICA AND OTHER PARTNERING NATIONS IN THE AID OF UKRAINE. >> A VERY GOOD MORNING. >> GOOD MORNING. >> UKRAINE IS ABSOLUTELY EXTREMELY IMPORTANT FOR POLAND. IS EXTREMELY IMPORTANT FOR THE REGION WITH GLOBAL IMPLICATIONS. FROM THE VERY FIRST DAY WE STARTED OUR SUPPORT, IN MANY DOMAINS, STARTING FROM A HUMAN APPROACH, OBSERVING 8 MILLION UKRAINIANS CROSSING THE BORDER. A FEW MILLION STILL STAYING IN POLAND. THEN WE STARTED SOCIAL PROGRAMS, MEDICAL PROGRAMS, EDUCATION FOR THEM. AND ADMITTEDLY, WE STARTED PREPARATION ON SENDING EQUIPMENT, AMMUNITION, AND ANYTHING THEY NEED FOR VICTORY. >> FOR VICTORY. >> GENERAL, SINCE THE WAR BEGAN, POLAND, THE CENTER OF GRAVITY OF NATO AND OF THE EU SEEMS TO HAVE MOVED EASY, TO POLAND, BASICALLY. POLAND IS AN INCREASINGLY, INCREDIBLY IMPORTANT COUNTRY. HOW IS THAT GOING DOWN IN POLAND? HOW ARE POLES REACTING TO THEIR NEW CENTRAL PLACE -- >> STATUS. >> -- IN EUROPE? >> WELL, YOU CAN FEEL EVERY SINGLE DAY THE CENTER OF GRAVITY ARE HISTORICAL COLD WARTIME DESIGN MOVE FROM GERMANY, TO POLAND, TO WARSAW. STRATEGY MATTERS AND GEOGRAPHY MATTERS. AND NOW WE HAVE ASPIRATIONS OF A WESTERN CIVILIZATION, AS WELL. SO NOTHING HAPPENED WITHOUT POLAND. WE INVEST HEAVILY IN SECURITY FROM THE VERY BEGINNING. 3% GDP, AND THE ENTIRE LIST OF PROGRAMS. MOST OF THE HIGH-TECH EQUIPMENT COMES FROM THE U.S., THE VERY FAMOUS, YOU KNOW, EFFECTIVENESS. M1 TANKS, AS WELL. THE MOST MODERN COMBAT PLATFORMS. AND VARIETY OF DIFFERENT PROGRAMS.
AND WE'RE GOING TO DO MORE. AND WE'RE GOING TO DO MORE. BUT THE FIRST IS JUST TO WIN UKRAINE. BECAUSE UKRAINE MATTERS. UKRAINE IS A BASIC PLATFORM FOR SECURITY. 100 YEARS AGO, THEY SAID, FREE UKRAINE, FREE POLAND. THERE'S A DIRECT CONNECTION, DIRECT RELATION. AND AFTER 100 YEARS, STILL. >> WE'RE ABOUT TWO WEEKS AWAY FROM THE ONE-YEAR ANNIVERSARY OF RUSSIA'S INVASION. OBVIOUSLY HAS NOT GONE THE WAY THAT VLADIMIR PUTIN THOUGHT IT WOULD GO. BUT FOR YOUR ASSESSMENT AS SOMEONE WHO STANDS SKPUNSAND UNDERSTANDS WAR, WHERE THINGS ARE GOING AND WHERE THINGS STAND GOING INTO THE SECOND YEAR. >> VERY DIFFICULT YEAR, BECAUSE MOSTLY IT GOES TO POLITICS, TO ECONOMY. SO WE NEED UKRAINE WINNING IN THE POLITICAL DEMAND, IN THE ECONOMICAL DOMAIN. THEY NEED MONEY, THEY NEED RESOURCES. THEY NEED EFFECTIVE SANCTIONS. AND OF COURSE, ONE OF THE CONDITIONS WILL BE THE MILITARY OPERATION, WHICH IS CRITICAL. BUT THE SITUATION IS STILL VERY DANGEROUS, VERY IMPORTANT, DRAMATIC FROM THE MORAL POINT OF VIEW. BUT IT'S DEFINITELY DECISIVE. WHAT WE DO TODAY GOES TO ETERNITY. IF WE NOT DO, IT GOES AS WELL. SO NOW OR NEVER. >> SO VLADIMIR PUTIN SEEMS WILLING TO ACCEPT MASSIVE, MASSIVE RUSSIAN CASUALTIES. THINK BACK TO THE SECOND WORLD WAR, PARTICULARLY. HOW LONG -- IS THIS INDEFINITE FOR HIM? IS HE WILLING TO STRETCH THIS OUT FOR YEARS? >> I GIVE YOU VERY MUCH A POLISH FLAVOR, A PERSPECTIVE. WE LIVE IN THE SPACE 1,000 YEARS AGO. SO WE KNOW THE RUSSIANS. THAT'S THE WAY THEY FIND. THIS IS NO SURPRISE FOR US. THE STANDARDS FOR RUSSIAN ARMY, FOR RUSSIAN SOCIETY IS COMPLETELY DIFFERENT. SO DO NOT COMPARE RUSSIANS USING WESTERN STANDARDS. WHAT YOU SEE BEHAVING, PERFORMANCE, YOU KNOW, HOW MUCH THEY'RE SUFFERING AND ARE STILL READY TO GO IS ABSOLUTELY DIFFERENT THAN IT WAS IN SOCIETY. SO PLEASE DO NOT ASSESS RUSSIANS AND OUR STANDARDS, BECAUSE THEY ARE COMPLETELY DIFFERENT. >> LET'S TALK ABOUT, FIRST OF ALL, I JUST WANT TO TALK ABOUT WHAT GENE SAID, IT'S REMARKABLE THAT POLAND NOW FINDS ITSELF WHERE WEST GERMANY WAS FROM 1945 TO 1989. YOU GUYS ARE ON THE FRONT LINES OF FREEDOM. AND AS SUCH, I THOUGHT IT WAS FASCINATING, A COUPLE OF WEEKS AGO, YOU PUSHED THE GERMANS TO MOVE WITH THANKS. THE GERMANS THEN PUSHED THE AMERICANS SAYING, WE'LL DO IT, BUT YOU ALL HAVE TO DO IT, AS WELL. SO POLAND WAS A REAL LEADER THERE. I'M CURIOUS, WHAT DIFFERENCE DO YOU THINK THAT'S GOING TO MAKE OVER THE NEXT YEAR, AND WHAT ELSE DO THE UKRAINES NEED THAT THEY DON'T HAVE RIGHT NOW? >> SIR, FROM THE VERY BEGINNING, OUR WILLINGNESS TO SEND EQUIPMENT WAS ABSOLUTELY CRITICAL. SO I GOT A VERY CLEAR MESSAGE FROM MY POLITICAL MASTERS, AS MUCH AS WE CAN, AND AS MUCH AS THEY NEED. SO THERE WAS THOUSANDS, HUNDREDS OF EQUIPMENT IS GOING TO UKRAINE. AND OF COURSE, FROM MANY OPERATIONAL REASONS, MILITARY REASONS, UKRAINE NEEDS TO CHANGE TO WESTERN PLATFORMS, BECAUSE OF AMMUNITION IS MUCH BETTER. SO POLAND FROM THE VERY BEGINNING STARTED TO PROMOTE IDEA TO BUILD A MULTI-NATIONAL COMPONENT AND WE ARE OFFERING A PLATFORM FOR TRAINING, FOR INTEGRATION, FOR NEW TANKS. SO THAT WAS THE REASON. AND BECAUSE WE ARE FRONT LINE, WE WOULD LIKE TO MOTIVATE AND INSPIRE ANYBODY, SO WE JUST OFFER A PLATFORM. BUT WAITING FOR ADDITIONAL, YOU KNOW, SUPPLIES. >> ONE OTHER QUICK QUESTION. WE ALWAYS TALK ABOUT WEAPONS, WAS LET'S TALK ABOUT TRAINING. 2014 WAS A DISASTROUS MILITARY CAMPAIGN FOR THE UKRAINIANS. AFTER THAT, THEY STARTED TRAINING WITH NATO. THEY STARTED TRAINING WITH POLES. THEY STARTED TRAINING WITH AMERICANS. TALK ABOUT THE DIFFERENCE OF HOW THE UKRAINIANS ARE NOW FIGHTING AND WE HAVE NCOs THAT GO OUT, CAN MAKE DECISIONS ON THE MOVE. THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN HAVING A BOTTOM-UP APPROACH IN WARFARE AND THE RUSSIAN TOP-DOWN APPROACH. HOW BIG OF A DIFFERENCE HAS THAT TRAINING MADE OVER THE PAST YEAR. >> IT WAS AN ABSOLUTELY HUGE DIFFERENCE. AND ONE OF THE CRITICAL FACTORS THAT THE UKRAINE ARMY IS SO EFFECTIVE IS A CHANGE IN PHILOSOPHY OF LEADERSHIP. SO MISSION COMMAND, GIVEN AUTHORITY VERY MUCH NOW, WHICH IS VERY MUCH MORE WESTERN, THE RUSSIANS ARE GOING STILL IN A VERY VERTICAL DECISION-MAKING PROCESS, WAITING FOR PERMISSION. AND IT DOESN'T WORK. SO THAT KIND OF CHANGE AND INVESTIGATING NCO CORE AS WELL IS ABSOLUTELY CRUCIAL. HUMAN FACTOR MATTERS. >> THE STORY OF POLAND REALLY BEING A CENTRAL PLAYER ON THE WORLD STAGE IS HAPPENING RIGHT NOW. AND POLAND REALLY STEPPED UP. >> HE WOULD BE SO PROUD. >> TAKING IN MILLIONS OF PEOPLE AND STEPPING UP IN THE FIGHT WITH 100% RESOLVE. I WOULD SAY, I'M PROUD TO BE A POLISH AMERICAN, REALLY, REALLY INCREDIBLE STORY.
POLISH CHIEF OF DEFENSE, GENERAL POLISH CHIEF OF DEFENSE, GENERAL RAY ANDRESCZEK, THANK YOU VERY|||[CC may contain inaccuracies] We're on the story.
Then the latest is Poland heading back into the EU mainstream?
And indeed, so what we've seen and it's a stunning upset for the ruling Justice
Party that was in power for eight years and frequently clashed with the EU and
also more recently with Ukraine. So what we're seeing right now is that
the so-called late fall, which is the projection based on 50% of votes
counted, shows that the opposition parties, three opposition parties are
likely to form a coalition together are in a comfortable lead.
They're probably going to get 24 to 248 seats and 460 seats, the lower chamber
of parliament, which means they are going to take power after the election.
The the unquestionable leader of the of the Opposition is done up to the civic
platform. And he used to be a he used to be
European Council president. So his first job and his first task will
be to mend fences with the EU to make sure that Poland receives
30 billion or more than €35 billion in funds that was withheld by the EU.
So that's his first order of business. But obviously this is going to be a very
slow process. The law and justice still got the most
votes, and there probably are also going to get the first take at forming the
government, which they're unlikely to to happen.
So it will be weeks before we actually see the government being formed and the
coalition taking power. The other good morning.
How enthusiastically will markets take an opposition win if it is confirmed?
And is it just about getting those EU funds released or is there something
more to it? So obviously the EU funds is the first
thing and it's kind of a more palpable thing, right?
What what's next is, is overall, it's also the change in the mood music.
What we've seen over the eight years is that Poland has been constantly
fighting. There was a constant spat over rule of
law, mainly with that with the EU. There was a lot of uncertainty.
So what the opposition provides for the market is more certainty that this will
end, and that's probably the reason why we're
seeing the currency gaining. Just on the fact that this this means
Poland closer to the EU, but also Poland more confident it will actually tempt
still top funds from the EU. And how important is it feel that we
know that the Europeans know very well, Don.
And so given his given his role, he's not an unknown character.
Indeed. So that's obviously the fact that he is
sort of the leader of the of the opposition, although it's three parties,
as a matter of fact, that's obviously he's a known face in Brussels.
He's been there, as you said, as the head of the European Council.
He's been through a lot of crises. He was involved during the negotiations
over Brexit, over the Greek debt crisis. So he's a he's a known character.
And obviously he's been very much trying to stress during the campaign that what
he needs to do is make sure that Poland is many ties with the EU.
So obviously is the fact that he's ahead and is will probably be taken positively
by Brussels.|||When we consider the history of
World War II as a whole, the year 1943
is of paramount importance. The strategies
established by the Allies are starting to bear fruit. Little by little, Hitler
and the Axis powers lose their footing in Europe
and in the Pacific. The Germans and the Italians
were threatened with a humiliating defeat on the coasts of North Africa,
because the Allied armies, under the command
of American General Eisenhower, constrained them
to abandon this continent. The theater of operations
from North Africa had already participated to mobilize significant
German military resources, far from the Eastern front, where the armies
of Hitler faced the Red Army. Furthermore, the Allies put
German territory under strain by systematically bombarding the
main industrial cities of the country. At sea, the British in the Atlantic
and the Americans in the Pacific began to resist
victoriously against enemy submarines. Planes and submarines
were coming out at a high rate equipped production lines
of the latest technologies. The use of aircraft
maritime patrol and light aircraft carriers
was also increasing. The liberation of Europe
was not possible before the battle
of the Atlantic is won. The genocide of the Jews
of Europe by the Nazis had passed
at a quasi-industrial stage. Accounts of these atrocities
reached London and Washington. The Prime Minister
British Winston Churchill, and American President Roosevelt judged that
the only possible answer could only be total defeat
from Nazi Germany and its criminal ideology. Already focused
on the next step, the march on Italy
with Sicily as a starting point, the determination of the Allies
was getting stronger day by day. At the end of 1942,
American and British forces had successfully landed
in North Africa. The Allies had also reached
to retain many French officers previously loyal
to the Vichy government, who collaborated with the Nazis. In the spring of 1943, Germany and Italy had continued
to send reinforcements from Europe across the Mediterranean. Allied troops,
composed mainly of Americans
relatively inexperienced, were moving forward
from Algeria to Tunisia and met
fierce resistance. They had to learn quickly,
in the worst conditions, but they were making progress. Towards the south, the Eighth Army led
by the English general Montgomery, had pushed the Germans back into Libya
and the desert fox, Erwin Rommel, exhausted by months of fighting,
had been recalled by Hitler and replaced. In the South Pacific,
Americans and Australians had undertaken operations
that they hoped to transform in a series of victories
in the Solomon Islands, north of Australia. Painfully and
at the cost of many lives, they managed to resume
the first Guadalcanal island. From this reconquest, they didn't leave
no respite for the Japanese. Japan, the strongest
Hitler's Allies, controlled a large area
including part of China, much of Southeast Asia,
Papua New Guinea and in the North Pacific,
two small islands in the Aleutians. It was necessary to maintain
the Japanese on the defensive to prevent them
to strengthen their positions on the islands
of the Pacific which they held, to build their air bases there and to make these territories
safe areas. In Africa, these strategic problems
were on the agenda. A conference was held in the city
Moroccan from Casablanca in January 1943. Churchill and Roosevelt, relying
on the advice of their staff, accepted the idea
of an invasion of Sicily as soon as possible, pushing back the landing
in France the following year. This decision went against
of certain American generals who did not want
that the war in the Mediterranean takes up too much
resources and time. The objective was to put Italy
out of combat, allowing the Allies to gain time
for preparation for disembarkation in the north of France. The English knew they were fighting
an industrial and military power still practically intact. Hitler and the Powers
of the Axis should be weakened by a second front
in Italy in the first place, before the direct attack in France
may be possible. At the beginning of April,
events in North Africa and plans for the invasion of Sicily
had become extremely important for all belligerents. Commander of the German forces
in the Mediterranean and North Africa, General Keyserling
could congratulate his troops for having slowed down the progress
allied to western Tunisia. Time was not on our side
Germans and Italians. The Axis forces were slowly, but surely rejected
towards the capital Tunis. Improved panzers
after the clashes against Soviet heavy tanks, played an important role
in these fights. The British and the Americans
quickly strengthened their position, mobilizing a number
growing number of tanks and planes
in North Africa. Many airfields
being now under their control, they were able to bring
their troops effective air support. In the first week of April, the Allies bombed
not only Italian soil, but managed to intercept transport planes
and loaded ships supplies for Africa. Moving carefully, sappers were working
for mine detection and repairs
craters on the road. The troops were happy
to cross these agricultural lands and its olive groves, after months
passed on rocky tracks of the Libyan desert. Even better,
Tunisian roads allowed them a conduct
much softer and more comfortable. Planting these banderillas on Kesselring,
American General Eisenhower was the commander in chief
allied forces in the Mediterranean, seconded by
Marshall Harold Alexander. Alexander reorganized
strategically the allied front, placing American troops
who were advancing from the west at the opposite
from the city of Bizerte, on the road that ran alongside
the north coast towards Tunis. The First British Army
arrival in North Africa with the Americans
a few months earlier, was ordered to advance
towards the Tunisian capital. One of the last commitments
for the men of Montgomery took place in Wadi Akarit,
25 kilometers north of Gabès. The fight was fierce,
but the British infantry, supported by
a large artillery, was able to launch
a general attack on the plain. On the evening of April 7, the Americans
and the English of the first army arrived in contact with the soldiers
of the Eighth Army which, for the most part, had never met
of American soldiers before. Allied troops
recently arrived, discovered the soldiers
of the eighth armed and very seasoned, scruffy and undisciplined, but driven by a corporate spirit
and extraordinary combativeness. All units were grouped together
for the final push Allies in North Africa. They had lost
thousands of men injured or killed in the desert sands. The progression continued. The Allies took
the Tunisian city of Sfax which was quickly followed
by the capture of Sousse on the coast. Therefore, after having carried out
the most decisive and the hardest fights
for North Africa, the eighth army which had arrived
so far away, found herself affected in a secondary role,
that of holding positions as far as possible
from Tunis to Bizerte and did not participate
in the last battles for Tunis. The die was cast for the Germans
and the Italians in North Africa. Among the Italians,
the flaws in their alliance with Germany
were more and more perceptible, aggravated by the imminence of a
Allied landing on their territory. Many Italian soldiers
were prisoners and support for the Axis was less and less obvious
in the population. Enthusiasm for war
hadn't been very big in 1940. Libya, which Mussolini wanted to make
the crown jewel of the new Italian empire,
was now lost. The duchy therefore did not reap from these fights
only paltry profits. The treatment
Italian workers sent to Germany
wasn't the best. Even their leader, Benito Mussolini,
asked questions on Hitler's intentions, because the supply promises
coal and oil that Germany had promised
never materialized. When Hitler and Mussolini
met near Salzburg, in Austria,
both appeared tense. Hitler's entourage was hit
to see to what extent Mussolini seemed discouraged
and sick, pleading for the beginning
peace talks with the Allies. The Führer did not want
hear about it and managed to bend it
and to comfort Mussolini so that he continues the fight
to hold Tunis, convincing his reluctant ally
that it was essential so that fascism
survives in Italy. Hitler's own situation
was far from brilliant. He had to face
to the criticism of his people who now
suffered enemy attacks and who felt that the Third Reich
wasn't so invincible that we had promised him. Propaganda played a role
more important than ever. Events in Russia
provided Hitler with new arguments to justify its policy. In a village called Katyn,
in the Russian countryside near Smolensk, a Russian peasant made an astonishing
declaration to the German occupiers. The bodies of thousands
missing Polish officers were buried
in the nearby forest. For Joseph Goebbels, the minister
propaganda, loyal to Hitler, this was the best news
received months ago. After some investigation
from the history of the Russian peasant, the Germans discovered a mass grave
of more than 4200 Polish officers massacred by
the Soviets in 1939, when Stalin
was Hitler's ally. The Russian position was delicate
because of their new alliance with the English and the Americans
after Operation Barbarossa. The Allies considered Stalin
with great suspicion. Goebbels was prompt
to condemn the unforgivable brutality Russians
towards Polish officers, omitting of course to mention
of the barbaric treatment that the Germans they themselves subjected the Poles to,
especially when they were Jewish. The situation became even more complicated. The Polish government,
in exile in London since 1939, wanted the atrocities of Katyn
lead to the end of the alliance with the Soviets. It took skillful political maneuvering
to maintain this delicate alliance. Responsible officials
American and British succeeded in preventing what could have
be a disastrous split in the allied pact. Furthermore, Poland remained
in the spotlight, because between April and May, the events
in the capital, Warsaw, occupied by the Germans,
were going to make headlines. Eastern Europe in 1943
kept too many secrets and hid
far too many horrors. At the beginning of April,
a new gas chamber was opened
in the Auschwitz camp, one of the six extermination camps
installed on Polish territory. Thousands of deportees,
mainly Jews from the nations
occupied Europeans, as well as
Poles and Gypsies, were transported
aboard cattle wagons. When they arrived, most of the men,
women and children were gassed. Only a minority were allowed
to live a little longer as forced laborers. In the Polish capital, Warsaw,
all the Jews had been confined in the old Jewish quarter,
now kept and isolated from the rest of the city
by high walls. Around 400,000 Jews and a few gypsies
survived on minimal rations, because the Germans
used the deprivations to facilitate
the spread of typhus and tuberculosis
including this weakened population. Then the pace of deportations towards the extermination camp
of Treblinka accelerated. In April 43, only 60,000 people
remained in the Warsaw ghetto, mainly young adults. These survivors, now knowing
that he had nothing more to lose, had formed
resistance groups who had weapons
transported clandestinely through the ghetto underground. After a first revolt
small in scale of the Jewish resistance in January, Heinrich Himmler,
head of the SS, decided the time had come
to completely raze the ghetto. On April 19,
he sent the SS there with tanks, flamethrowers
and demolition units. Despite desperate resistance
groups that are however summarily armed, the Germans
reduced everything to ashes, 13,000 Polish Jews were massacred
during this revolt. The ghetto uprising had been
a courageous and desperate act of defiance. But he gave a taste
of what awaited Hitler and his generals
in a close future. Resistance against the Axis
was getting stronger and stronger and the fighting intensified
around the world. For the Allies,
it was time to plan and strategic studies. Keeping shipping routes open
to transport troops to their destination was of vital importance. While the British Navy
regained control in the North Atlantic on the theater
South Pacific operations, American pilots
and the marines were at the forefront of the counterattack against Japan. In New Guinea
and in the Solomon Islands, in the north of Australia,
the Japanese were now cornered on the defensive under the command
of Admiral I Roku Yamamoto. Yamamoto had done
his studies in the United States. He initially opposed
to militarism who had driven
Japan at war, but now,
he was a target for the Americans. He was the one who imagined
and planned the attack against Pearl Harbor
in December 41. The Japanese saw
in him a hero of the nation. The Americans were eager
to eliminate the person responsible thousands of deaths. In 1943, the Americans intercepted
and decoded a radio message who revealed to them that Admiral Yamamoto
was going to come to the Solomons to inspect his troops. The bomber carrying
the admiral had to land on an island near Bougainville,
in the Northern Solomons. On April 18, several American fighters
took off from Guadalcanal following orders
of President Roosevelt and headed towards the route
which Yamamoto's plane was to follow. The bomber on board
where the admiral was, was attacked and went down in flames
above the Bougainville jungle. Yamamoto's body was discovered by
a Japanese research expedition, but Tokyo did not announce his death
only weeks later lest it affect
the morale of the population. The Americans, for their part, couldn't celebrate
their triumph publicly, because that would have revealed
that he had broken the communication code
of the Japanese Navy. They also did not announce
Yamamoto's death. On April 21, Roosevelt revealed that three airmen
Americans had been executed in Japan. These three men,
two pilots and a machine gunner, were part of the 80 men
who had survived the raid, led by lieutenant-colonel
Jimmy Doolittle before. The Americans had hoped
strike the spirit of the Japanese by bombing military targets
and industrial on their territory. It was the first raid against Japan,
a humiliating provocation for which they would seek revenge. The news of this execution
prisoners of war horrified the Americans. Roosevelt announced that those responsible
would not go unpunished. A message which was also
a warning to the Japanese regarding treatment
of some 17,000 Americans then detained
by the Empire of the Rising Sun. In May 1943,
a confrontation between the United States and Japan unfolded
on the northern borders of the Pacific Ocean, in the Aleutian Islands. A chain of small volcanic islands, stretching from Alaska
to Siberia and Japan. In 1942, Japanese forces
had seized of two islands
from the archipelago near Japan, Attu and Kiska. Thanks to their intelligence services,
the Americans did not take into account this invasion, because they knew
that it was just a diversion and what do the Japanese actually do?
were going to attack Midway Island in the central Pacific,
a more strategically important island. Japanese propaganda had largely
exploited this invasion of the Aleutians, and now the Americans
wanted to drive them out. They had started to build an airfield
on Attack Island, near Alaska. At the end of April, an American expeditionary force
was sent by sea from San Francisco to Attu Island, a desolate island
where the wind blew so strong that practically
no trees grew. After two days,
the warships were in position and began to bomb
Japanese defenses. At the beginning of May,
a dense fog drowned the island. Infantry, using barges
disembarkation, surprised the Japanese garrison. During violent fighting which
took place throughout the month of May, the American soldiers managed to reach the valley
leading towards Chicago Harbor. The Japanese did not surrender. The last of
they left their position and charged the American lines
in a suicidal attack. She had no results. These fights were coming to an end and more
2,000 Japanese had already been killed. The Americans themselves,
had lost 500 men and more than 2000 were evacuated,
victims of cold or illness. Attu again
in American hands was now between
Japanese territory and the island of Kiska, where were still stationed
Japanese troops. This one wasn't going to stay
on the island for a long time. The Americans barely came
to set foot on Attu in August 43, that the five men
of the Kiska garrison were evacuated, leaving the Aleutians and their climates
inhospitable to Americans. In North Africa,
German and Italian troops around Tunis
found themselves trapped. They no longer had
possible path of retirement. Despite Rommel's request
addressed to Hitler and Mussolini to evacuate
these men from North Africa and preparing them prevented
an Allied landing in Europe, the Germans continued
to transport troops and equipment to Tunis, and this, practically
until the last minute. In May, Bizerte fell to the hands
American units and further south, General Alexander
launched a new offensive supported by important
artillery barrages against Tunis. Very quickly, the first
English armored vehicles entered the city. Thousands of residents came out
in the streets to welcome them, throwing flowers to the soldiers. Outside the city,
enemy troops, although surrounded,
continued to fight, rejecting all
offers of surrender. Kesselring had already left
the African continent, when finally,
at the end of the second week of May, the Germans accepted
their fate and surrendered. Prisoners of war
crowded into the camps 125,000 Germans and 115,000 Italians. It was the biggest concentration
of prisoners at this stage of the war, with the consequence
serious logistical problems. Eisenhower was not particularly
disturbed by this minor complication and jubilantly announcing to the world
that the Axis armies were now retreating. Adolf Hitler had an army
which we called the Afrikakorps, commissioned by
General Erwin Rommel, also known by the nickname
by Desert Fox. [German spoken audio] The troops
du Renard were destroyed. All the men
of this army sent to Africa to fight under Rommel's orders
were killed or captured. Three hours after the surrender,
Winston Churchill, in meeting
with Roosevelt in Washington, received a message
of General Alexander informing him: “The campaign in Tunisia is over. All enemy resistance has ceased. We are the masters
of the coasts of North Africa. After three years of fighting, success and setbacks in the deserts
and in the mountains, the Allies finally rewarded, could celebrate the end of the control
of the Axis on this part of Africa. In Washington, President Roosevelt
and Winston Churchill discussed with the highest decision-makers
British and American military during a conference
codenamed Trident. On May 19, Churchill addressed
in both houses of Congress, like he did
in December 1941, following
Japanese bombing against Pearl Harbor. He was welcomed
with warm applause even before
before he delivers his speech. But Churchill was impatient
to get back to serious things. All the plans, he said,
must be dominated by the supreme objective
to attack the enemy. Germany's defeat
must occur first. It will inevitably lead to
the defeat of Japan. There were disagreements
between Allied commanders on what to do
regarding future operations. Churchill demanded that a landing
takes place directly in Italy, which, he thought,
would serve to attract German soldiers far from the Russian front
where Stalin was still fighting for the survival of his country. Americans, on the other hand,
wanted to disembark on a large scale in France,
launched as soon as possible, and that no transaction likely
to delay this project from being undertaken. After a long debate, an agreement was reached
within the Allied command to disembark in France
in 1944 with a deadline scheduled for the month of May. Churchill obtained satisfaction
as for the Italian campaign, less priority, in order to force
this country to cease hostilities. Furious fights
took place in the Atlantic. Before a landing
in France can take place, the Allies knew
that the Battle of the Atlantic had to be won. However, the heavy losses
suffered in early spring had seriously affected
the supply of the British Isles. There was great fear that the Germans
won the war at sea. Fortunately, in May,
the fate began to turn, slowly but surely. At the end of the month,
a quarter of the entire operational force submarines
Germans had been sunk. The son of Admiral Donitz,
Commander-in-Chief of the Navy, perishes with
her crew on May 19. A few days later,
the command decided that it was time
to withdraw from the South Atlantic. The handle of U-Boats
who was still marauding no longer represented only a symbolic threat. The Axis Battle
for two years to break the roads
supply, was lost. Allied factories
increased arms production, but the war effort was beginning
to be felt not only at sea, but also
in the skies of Germany. Throughout the spring of 1943,
waves of British bombers attacked the main cities
of the Third Reich, following orders
of Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Harris. Haunted by the memory of the trenches
of the First World War, the British saw
in aerial bombardment a way to avoid a front on the ground
and accelerate the end of the conflict. Heavy bombing
were not only aimed the most important industries. They were also used
as a psychological weapon to mine
civilian morale. During the war,
hundreds of thousands of Germans found themselves homeless
following these attacks. Living conditions
deteriorated in the cities. At the same time,
support for Adolf Hitler, inevitably weakened. In May 1943, the R.A.F. finalized the last details
of a particularly daring raid to blow up
the Ruhr dams in Germany. The objective was to break
three dams in this region where were located
the main production sites of German heavy industry:
steel mills, chemical plants and coal mines. In the greatest secrecy,
an aeronautical engineer named Barns Wallis, developed
a barrel-shaped bomb which he hoped would bounce back
on the water surface towards the dam, thus avoiding anti-torpedo nets
who protected him. The bomb was then to flow along
of the dam wall before exploding. On May 16, the air raid
successfully destroyed the first two dams,
but the third remained intact. Millions of liters of water
gushed from the breaches of the two dams flooding mines, coupons,
roads, railways, canals and water supply. At least 1,650 people drowned. Unfortunately, only
nine of the 19 aircraft of the R.A.F managed to return to their base
and 53 crew were killed in action
in this operation. Despite these losses,
this event was a breath of fresh air for the morale of the British,
still subject to Luftwaffe raids. As for the populations
of occupied Europe, the vision of these allied bombers
on the way to Germany, gave them hope. A landing on the French coast
of the Channel was being prepared. This hope was therefore not
unfounded. To better prepare
this operation scheduled in 1944, that is to say the following year, Roosevelt wanted to tie
contacts with French resistance fighters. The French had been deeply divided by
the Second World War. There were divisions
between those who supported General de Gaulle based in London
and those who supported the collaborationist government
of Marshal Pétain in Vichy. There was also
deep divisions at the heart of the Resistance,
especially due to the communists who did not support de Gaulle. During the conference
from Casablanca in January, there was a rather tense meeting
and difficult between de Gaulle and his rival, General Giraud, who continued
to maintain the Vichy regime in North Africa. However, jointly
at the head of the Free French Forces, they called all the French
to rally their cause. Later, the National Council
of the Resistance was established to organize
the various resistance groups who carried out operations
of sabotage against the occupier. Part of the French population
did what she could to help the Allies. During this time,
the American secret services began to build their own relationship
with the French resistance from contacts
established in Switzerland to improve financing
resistance actions and thus access
military and strategic information on the troops
Germans in France. But fight for freedom
was not done without risk. Shortly after the first meeting of the
new National Council of Resistance, many chefs
networks were shut down. During the war,
many men and women who fought
occupying troops in France were incarcerated,
tortured and killed by the Gestapo. But despite its dangers,
the fight had never stopped. In Europe, the process of genocide
was accelerating. By the summer of 1943, more than half of the Jews
of Europe had been massacred. Quite proud
of their extermination program, the Nazis never discussed the details
of these operations in their propaganda, using euphemisms such as actions
specific or special measures. At Auschwitz, an average of 33,000 people
were gassed every month. After elimination
from the Warsaw ghetto, on June 11, the leader of the SS, Heinrich
Himmler gave the order to dismantle and empty
all other remaining ghettos in some cities in Poland. Poland had
largest Jewish population of all the states of Europe,
approximately 3 million people. Most of them will be killed, as well as three million
others from elsewhere before the Allies
do not achieve victory. Further east, in the Baltic countries
and in the part of the Soviet Union occupied by the Nazis,
special units of the SS, the Einsatzgruppen acted freely
behind the front line troops. Entire communities were massacred
mercilessly during mass executions. While the Nazis pursued
their war of terror, the allies were getting closer. Following the agreements
of the Trident conference in Washington, preparations for disembarkation
in Italy were beginning. North Africa, now cleared
Axis troops, Eisenhower concentrated
his attention to Mussolini in order to
to push him to stop the war. American bombers intensified
their attacks on ports, airfields
and industrial zones. In Sicily, the towns of Palermo,
Catania and Syracuse were targeted. Sardinia,
where there was a large garrison German soldiers,
was also affected. Messina and Naples, Italy,
suffered heavy bombardments. Allied aircraft based
in Malta had started to bomb
the port of Naples since 1940. The city knew
what was an air attack, but with
the acceleration of alerts, life in this summer of 1943
became unbearable. The explosions echoed
regularly in the city. Water shortages
and food were frequent. Despite significant reinforcements,
German air power in Italy marked time
facing Allied aviation. The Neapolitans suffered one
of the largest bombings that they never have
known until then. The Germans were
unable to send the planes and D.C.A batteries
that Mussolini had urgently requested. Fearing that the Allies
don't show up at any moment, thousands of Italians
left their home in the south of the country. Convinced that it was
only a matter of time before the allies do not launch the attack,
the Germans moved troops from France to Italy. The Allies, however, had lost
a little time to debate the best course
to follow for their campaign before deciding that Sicily
would constitute the ideal bridgehead for the conquest of Italy. The tiny Italian island
from Pantelleria, located on the way to Sicily,
not far from the Tunisian coast, was a step
on the road to the main island. With its steep cliffs,
Pantelleria had been used as an air base
and submarine by axis forces. Attacks were launched
against British ships in Mediterranean
from this island. According to Winston Churchill,
Pantelleria, was a thorn in the side and now posed a problem
for the invasion of Sicily. To make sure
that nothing could prevent the success of these men
in their mission in Italy, Eisenhower designed a project
quite unpleasant for the small island. He and his staff wanted to check if it was possible to weaken
such a target from the air in order to then be able to
invade it with a reduced force. Pantelleria became a testing ground
to observe the effects of a saturation bombardment
on a well-defended coast. Allied planes began
to bomb the small island from May and during
the following five weeks. More than 500 bomber raids
were carried out and 6300 tons of bombs dropped
on Italian and German troops. The barracks, the depots
and the planes were hit at the Pantelleria airfield, while the ships
British combat opened fire on the port
and on the gun emplacements along the coast. On June 10,
the offensive reaches its climax. Whole waves of bombers
take off from Tunisia, bombarding the island day and night,
stopping only to give time to the Allies to invite
the island to go to. Simultaneously from Washington, Roosevelt urged
the Italians to overthrow Mussolini. Those who wanted to get rid
of the dictator were numerous, but they were going to stay
in power for a while longer. In Pantelleria,
no surrender having taken place, a British infantry division
left the Tunisian coast on board landing ships. Around 11 a.m.,
on June 11, an allied plane spotted
a white cross on the airfield just before the infantry
arrives on the beach. It was the first time in history
than enemy territory only capitulated
following a bombing, even before the troops
have not set foot on the ground. The operation had proven
that the Allies were not joking. Eisenhower could now
focus on preparations of the invasion of Sicily. On the other side of the globe,
in the Pacific theater of operations, events were accelerating. The Allies resumed
supremacy over the seas. As an island nation,
Japan depended on maritime relations with the rest of the world, and that's it
who had led him to war. When the United States imposed
sanctions in Japan regarding supply
in raw materials, the Empire of the Rising Sun
had no other choice than fighting for survival. In 1943, the Japanese having to defend
and administer new territories were confronted
to considerable difficulties. It was vital for them that
maritime connections are maintained, allowing the sending of troops and ammunition up to
most isolated southern garrisons. The attack on Pearl Harbor
in December 1941, during which
many American ships had been destroyed
or put out of action, had been an entry
in shattering war for Japan. These troops encountered only a few
of opposition in the conquest of the islands around the Pacific. Their enemies still in shock, the Japanese did
everything that was possible to take advantage
their success at Pearl Harbor. Japanese submarine crews
were particularly well trained. They were equipped
long lance torpedoes. They had shown themselves
much more effective than that of American submarines,
often victims of failure. These did not explode
on impact or explode before reaching their target, or followed
aberrant trajectories. The American military
were more and more concentrated on technologies
and the tactics that could ensure their superiority
on the Japanese in the Pacific. The events of Pearl Harbor
showed them that they were not at the end of their
pains before achieving this result. At first
of the Pacific War, the commanders
American submarines knew they were poorly prepared
to the battles that awaited them. American military decision-makers
finally heard their voice and in 1943,
designed new torpedoes, developing a model with
a more powerful payload. The Americans would benefit
the effect of surprise on their enemies and tilt the fate
fights in their favor. Applying
bold tactics, the Americans launched
surprise attacks against ships
Japanese merchants. This strategy
was quickly extended. It turned out to be very effective,
because US Navy submarines, become more
more daring, attacked as close as possible to the surface
rather than from the depths. A year ago,
the code breakers had succeeded to decipher the codes
of the Japanese Navy. Now they provided
more precise information to the submarine commander
regarding the positions possible targets on the surface. As a result, submarines
Americans were equipped with radar making it possible to detect
the ships in their vicinity, while the patrols, spotted the submarines
Japanese diving. The pace of attacks on ships
Japanese increased significantly throughout 1943, the Americans attacking
as many military ships that merchant ships
and even fishing fleets. Slowly, but inexorably,
the allies regained control in the rough waters of the Pacific. General Douglas MacArthur, supreme commander of the forces
Allies in the South West Pacific, represented for the Japanese an implacable enemy at sea,
in the air and on the ground. Ensure air superiority
was a constant concern in the South Pacific, where American troops
and Australians were now progressing more and more inside
from the southern perimeter limit Japanese possessions. At the beginning of June, Admiral William Halsey ordered
the attack on new Georgia, the largest island in the west of the islands
Solomon, who was immediately north of Guadalcanal. The Americans had been warned
that the Japanese were building an airfield in Munda, the largest colony
of new Georgia. Air attacks
against American troops would have represented
a significant danger. The Japanese, for their part,
feared that if the Americans managed to hold Guadalcanal, this would give them a starting point
for operations to reconquer the islands one after the other
towards the north of the Solomons. This would put
the strategic base of Rabaul on the island of New England,
crucial for the Japanese under the threat
directly from the Americans. Everything Japan
could try to stop American forces in their advance
was considered a priority. Although the Japanese attacks
against Guadalcanal has little chance of moving
the Americans from their position, they disturbed them, but the American advance
towards Rabaul does not slow down. The Marines landed
at the southern tip of new Georgia, left defenseless and started
to advance towards the port of Viry. Without waiting to have eliminated
the Japanese garrison strong of more than 10,000 men
who occupied the rest of the island, they started
to build an airfield where they had landed. Allied planes
based on this new airfield provided them with air support
invaluable in their fight to conquer the whole
of new Georgia. When Munda Air Base
fell into the hands of the allies, few weeks later, the troops of Guadalcanal, who always fought last
bastions of Japanese resistance, were a little relieved. Japanese bombing attempts
American positions on Guadalcanal from their base in New Georgia
allowed us to imagine the problems to whom were going
be confronted by the troops if we gave the Japanese time
to consolidate their positions in the newly conquered territories. Japanese culture
to never give up your arms meant that every square kilometer
of territory in the Pacific, on land or sea,
would be defended to the death. The Allies had a goal
terribly difficult to reach. The cost in terms of lives sacrificed
was going to become impressive, but it was the price to pay to end expansionism
Japanese in the Pacific. A heavy price also had to be paid
to defeat Hitler in Europe. The war also took
its due on civilian populations everywhere in proportion
which were going to become unbearable. England continued
to suffer Luftwaffe raids. In every country
under the boot of the Führer, the terror was permanent. The reports
the atrocities committed were terrible. On the military level,
the immediate concern of the Allies was the landing in Sicily. Several questions
remained unresolved, especially those
which concerned the political reaction when they landed in Italy. The conquest of Italy
would allow us to appreciate to what extent those who had
adhered to Hitler's utopia would be able
to turn against it.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||We are BIRDWATCHERS We are connected by birds: large and smaller, gray and colorful, common and rare. This passion pushes us to various strange behaviors: we willingly get up before dawn to listen to the birds singing at sunrise, we travel tens, sometimes hundreds of kilometers without hesitation to see for a moment a species of bird that we have never seen before. Going to the sea we are really happy that there is a storm and we look at the sky more often than others. Is it a hobby, passion or rather a way of life? PART I - And that is cool, when you stay here for three months... And life in there is...  slow. - It is obvious, you need to get up early in the morning, sometimes even before dawn. There is a lot of work, sometimes you need to stay in the woods until evening. -  When I was young I really wanted to work like David Attenborough, and then I had... Well, I had many dreams and targets: while I was studying biology I wanted to work in the lab, but i quickly abandoned that desire. I fell in love with the work in the forest. -I lead the researches in the Bialowieza Forest, they concern factors conditioning Robin's breeding success. Robin is rather inscrutable bird. - It's really hard to find it's nest - it's amazingly secretive bird in breeding season. Furthermore, he can deceive. If he feels watched,  he carries the nest material to the place, which can be located even fifty meters away from the real nest. - In the half of June, last Robins abandons their nests. - Right now we need to check, whether the whole Robin family left the nest. - We will need a ladder for this. - Oh, that is a wolves pack's job, which walks here on the edge of the forest. It can be seen, that they had a feast few months ago. That corpse is a Red deer - probably a doe. - The voices of the birds are also used to catch the males. We place a speaker near the special net, we play mating voice of the male. Birds in the area are getting upset and they want to find the source of the sound and they fall right into special ornithological net, which is almost invisible in the dark forest. The birds need some time to represent their song. - Then they are getting closer and closer, to the moment when they find the source of the sound and fall into the net, where speaker is located. - The most important sense in the forest is the hearing. Birds communicate with the contact voices, but the most important is the singing. It informs females about the condition of the male, - is it worth setting up a nest with him. This is also a signal for the males: "This is my territory and do not look in there." - It's worth mentioning, that the Robin is amazingly plastic when it comes to nest sites. It can make a nest at the ground, under the ferns, in the hollow at the height of one and half meters, or in the hollow on the twelve or fifty meters, - There is an example of nest which Robin claims. It's a gap in a narrow lime tree. There are visible traces after a woodpecker. - Durning the research of Robins we also find nests of different birds, which make nests in really incredbile places. By the way, we found a Treecreeper's nest. They form their nests between bark: these are very unstable constructions. As you can see, it's withering, well already dead spruce. Behind a piece of the bark you can see potruding spruce twigs. It's a sign for us, that there is a Treecreeper' s nest and the chicks are in it. - Yes, Patryk is coming - Do you hear alarmed Red-Breated Flycatcher calls? Worrying? - Białowieża Forest, including Białowieża National Park is a place of occurrence of more than two hundred fourty species of birds. - If we realize, that in whole Poland occurrence of four hundred fifty species was identified, then we have more than half of birds identified in this place. - In the whole Great Britain there barely are seventy five species of breeding forest birds, while there is about one hundred twenty. The fact of the species numbers makes this forest special. - Some time ago whole Europe, whole european lowlands looked just like place where we are currently standing, we are experiencing journey into the past. - From Patryk Rowiński's iniciation I have started my PhD research with Kasia Kanclerska. It was about Robin. And now, here we are in our Byzantium, in our old Białowieża shack. Patryk wanted to have a nice little house right over there, under the forest, so we rent it for three months. We are renting it from the end of March to the beginning of the June. - In march, when the bison stays in the open area, they are walking very close to us. Even one bison with transmitter was eating something behind the meadow. We have got here few Red-backed Shrikes, River Warblers and Corncrakes. Corncrakes are getting at the latest from our neighbours. There is beautiful, there is fantastic, you can fall in love. - We are spending whole spring in te field. We see everything change, how in the beginning undergrowth is getting colors just to the late spring, early summer when everything turns green in the forest and you can see nothing. - We have D4 to ring, ring in K1 and nest to pick in M5, anything else? - Let's go to the K1 first, its the furthest one. - There is shortcut over here, there is that little swamp, otherwise we would have to go around. - There, it doesn't look bad... but there... but there... - I think we must walk on the log. - Kaśka, help! - It ends up like this when I use shortcuts. - It always end up like this. - Come on, let's go, I'm getting cold and I need to warm up. -You know what, last time I had birds circling around with hood over here. - There is a small hollow, I think he would fit in it. - I fell little bit different, and sometimes I feel treated by society just like weirdo. And it's weird for me. Everyone needs some closeness to the nature. Everyone feels better in the forest, feels good at the meadow, everyone relaxes then. - This is somewhere around there, so we can look around. - Do you need flashlight? - This is the last nest in season, season is about to end. Exactly now the chicks are hatching. It's an amazing moment when tiny Robins comes out from eggs, - We have six eggs and two chicks are already hatching. - We will come back here. Sunrise at spring Biebrza and Narew's backwaters is a breathtaking sight. Intensive birds migration lasts here at spring. River, like highway for birds is a corridor where first herds of geese and ducks fly. Then Lapwings, Golden Plovers, or the most spectacular ones - Battalions. The Battalions are real symbol of Biebrza. Herds counting of tens are stopping here to prey, and various colorful males are carrying battles and fights. For many years ornithologists are trying to recognize and describe birds' summer migration. it's a difficult task. Especially, that the most of species willingly migrates on the cloudless nights, having only moon's location and stars constellations to guide their way. Nowadays, naturalists are being helped by modern technology. Thanks to it, we can try to precisely examine migration, which were hidden from human's eye till now. - So what? We are getting back inside? It's surprising that the radar used on the ships has became helpful tool for the ornithologists. - Most of the people treats it as...  device for recognition of the flying objects, UFO's; they treat us a little bit like people from space, space research station. - Of course, always when we tell people that we are examining something that is closest to human-nature, interest arises, how we can without any interference, remotely discover that nature and build knowledge. - Come on! - We must separate vertical radar's working area. Vertical radar works on height of five meters, unfortunately, it can still reach human's head. So to prevent accident, we always separate radar's working place. - Rafał, maybe we need to refuel? Over! - We will be able to launch the servers in a while. I just need to connect to the power and these few servers. Such a bunch of wires... - Ok, now - Alright - It's not working. No, it`s ok. - Oh, there is it. - Ok. Cool, cool. - Oh! Doggy! Hey, you came to work? - In this moment I'm setting up an audio recording and I will check the sound recording's level. It's important to separate as much noise as we can, and lose as much as possible from that, what is in front of us in area and that, what microphone have to capture. - The device behind us is called 3Bird Radar System. It's made up of two marine antennas, which are sending electromagnetic waves, and then identify objects in area. In this case we are using it to register birds' flights. In this way we can check what happens in every second at three hundred sixty degrees around us and five kilometers above us at the moment. - The selection of place is crucial in our examination. At the moment, we are by the river, so we can examine birds flight very well in the river valley. Radar works like a flashlight, big spotlight. I'm sure that if I would lamp giant spotlight towards that forest, that's what is happening behind the forest will be invisible. If we had to deal with high flights of big birds, in this moment we will surely register them in  area behind the forest. - The flock of Ruffs just flew, there is probably next flock. - Rafał, will we try to track them? - They are low... ...meter, maybe half above water. - Alright, I saved it in base. - An interesting flock flew by there, to South. - Here, on the screen we can see the velocity of moving object, in this case a bird, because we are watching birds. We can see the distance, which they have travelled from the registering moment. We can also see their height, if they are moving in the field of the beam of the vertical radar. - Ruffs  have a speed of sixteen meters per second today. - And here we have got another flock. Oh, here is it. It's two hundred twenty meters away from us, isn't it? We can see them really intensively on the radar. - If the system detects groups of pixels, which are moving in one direction, we detect it as a birds flock. Here, it marks as blue. We can see, that it's surely something really huge. The red colour means that we have a big bird, it's more like it doesn't herding character. Orange ones - they are medium sized birds, and yellow are the smallest ones. - In night hours there are many birds flying by, and with help of radar we can examine them, and count. We can also measure the height of the flights. - Species of the birds we are trying to recognize by the audio recordings. We are making them by using directional microphone. We are pointing it up, and waiting for the intensive night migration occurrence. Usually, these migrations are appearing hour or two after the sunset. These are very frequent flights, reaching about one thousand, or one thousand five hundred meters above the ground. We aren't able to observe them in any method. Radar is the only available tool, available technology, that we can freely use for such purposes. - And what? Something happens? - It looks like a trend reserved a little bit. The fact remains, that the trend of flights in the direction of Biebrza has ceased, but the first, flights to the south are more common, and second, are directing to the direction of Narew. - Yes - And that's interesting. Look, see? - Hmmm, really. - Like the trend has reversed. - We can see now that the river valley is less intensively used by birds that are migrating by day. There are no clear flights in the North direction, however the activity of smaller birds has appeared. It can be also bats activity, which characterizes, by groups of, which are flying really slowly, from one to three meters per hour. - I used to lie on such a meadow at night. I was looking at starry sky and I was thinking: damn, only me and the stars. From a certain time I know, that I am not alone. That between me and the stars there is also really intensive traffic. Magical Podlasie in spring is even more beautiful than ever Rivers Biebrza and Narew generously spill their waters on the nearby meadows, which are waking up to live from the winter slumber. Man has lived here for centuries, with symbiosis with nature. His leisurely lifestyle was suit by seasons and spilling river. We are lucky, that we can still be witness of this spectacle of nature. PART II - Come one, come one, come one, right there - We came to this place around 1998/2000 and the first we did, was the land buyout because the most of the area we can see around us is a property of PTOP (Polish Society for the Protection of Birds) As we have already bought some land, there’s a small river right behind us. It’s called Rudnia and it used to flow different way It was a simple channel, dug straight to the river. We have decided to recreate Rudnia’s old riverbed, and river went back to that old riverbed From 200 meters of simple channel it became 2 kilometres of flowing river - So it’s like natural island? - Yes. It’s a natural island, island which is located just between Rudnia’s river mouth and Narew river. Podlasie. From spring to autumn at the meadows looked after by PTOP cows and horses are being grazed. This type of grazing allows to restore and maintain breeding places of waders the ones that are the most endangered: Lapwings, Redshanks and Black-tailed Godwits. -We are beginning grazing season at our meadows. The first herds of polish horses and polish red cows has arrived. - Why are they separated? - There are few reasons. First, we need to have a proper stocking density. That means that birds can’t have too much or not enough animals. And that’s why we are trying to regulate the stocking density, so given number of hectares owns proper number of animals. Second, it’s in case of various situations: sometimes our fences can be damaged by a Bison or an Elk. It’s easier to control few groups. If one group escapes, it always moves towards its neighbours and asks “Hey, may we join you?”, and they’re staying with the other group, so we don’t need to run after around the woods. Third, natural groups are never huge. They usually are up to 10 horses. So if we accumulated all our 50 horses in one group, it would be kind of weird. -These are Polish Primitive Horse and Polish Red Cattle. They’reprimitive breeds so they are excellently dealing with this difficult terrain. It’s not a good forage. It’s sedge and reed, so it’s not high-quality grass. Other races or other horses wouldn’t eat this willingly but they… - As you can see, they are now eating that sedge, 
as they will start eating this youngreed in few moments. And that’s what we wanted - the shape of habitat is changing. - After introducing the grazing, the amount of waders in this area has tripled. There are Common Snipe, Lapwings, Redshanks, Black-tailed Godwits.
Really nice squad of birds. We have mowed area before, but the grazing helped the best 
and the amount is three times bigger than it was before. - After grazing there are also general birds like Starlings, Pipits, Wagtails, Whinchats 
and many, many more species. There’s so many birds around the horses, because where the grass is grazed, 
it’s like a cafeteria for them. Majority of people doesn’t associate grazing of cow and horses with nature conservation. Meanwhile, thanks to the cows and horses favourable habitats are being created. Lapwings eagerly builds their nests in low grass, and trampled by cows small swamps 
are good for Black-tailed Godwits or Great Snipes. Grazing is an so-called active conservation, that is, actions performed by human 
that lead to restore convenient conditions for nature. - It will be also feeding grounds of White Storks that will be walking with these animals in a while. The first Stork has already arrived today. Moreover, Lesser Spotted Eagles which are breeding nearly are also fond of grazed area, 
so it serves many species. - What are our biggest problems? We have released horses and cows today, and what now? 
Nobody controls them? How does it look like? Surely there’s some kind of supervision over what’s happening here from your side. Right? - We have hired a person, who supervises all the pastures. He’s probably walking somewhere here at the other side at the moment. 
We have hired this man from nearby town. Of course, we also have to be here from time to time, and check if the herd did not run away
and often catch them and bring them back. Things happens. - How long horses are staying here? Surely all the summer… - They’re here all the grazing season. They are leaving in October, at the end of it. - They’re leaving in October, but everything really depends of two things: how fast they eat, and, we are in the floodplain valley of Narew river. This river changes its shape a little… Well, not a little, and it shapes our decisions in a great extent. Last year there was a really wet autumn, so the animals left earlier. If it’s dry, they can stay longer. So the river tells us: “it’s the time” or “ we’ll wait a little longer”. - It’s the same thing with spring. We can let animals in only when the water goes down. That valley there is flooded in March and April. 
In May water goes down, and we can release the animals. -There’s something going. What’s that?
-These are cows. - Where are they going?
- Mr Darius, you will wait, there’s a traffic jam over there. - Alright. Mr Waldek must wait, he needs to go back there. - He needs to unload first. - At the moment there’s four of them near lodging. 
- Or five? - What about the“collision” between birds nest and an animal, like for example horse, won’t horse destroy this nest? - There’s such a small stocking density right now, it’s maybe half a horse per hectare. There are also only a few pairs of birds, o it’s rather unlikely that any animal will accidentally step onto the nest. There’s a bigger problem with predators, both these from air and ground such as: Foxes, Mink and a Raccoon Dog that are destroying nests. - It’s not only a matter of birds. The insects, amphibians, and everything that lives there; they are all benefiting from this. - As we know, the Fire-bellied Toads are also often staying at grazing areas. - Some might say: “The horses, the transports. 
Are they worth it? One lawn mower would be enough”. - First of all, there would be fewer birds, because we would use and mow these fields. Second, we would be having many problems with picking up the hay. These are wet terrains. If it rains in June, we are not able to collect the dry hay, and all the fields would have to remain with the biomass on the top, 
which would be bad for the habitats. Besides that, we are creating some kind of mosaic, so the terrain looks different. Getting rid of the reed is also progressing. There was no difference after the mowing. The reed always grew back. And now after few years of grazing, there’s like half less of it. So it really works. Area of the pastures where horses and cows of the PTOP are grazing is getting bigger all the time. At the moment it’s almost five hundreds hectares of fields in North East Poland. The more terrains, the bigger is the change for successful breeding of more rare species. Let’s hope, that thanks to these actions, 
later generations will also get the chance to enjoy spring sounds of birds. Beskid Niski Mountains. One of the last, really wild places in Poland. It’s not a surprise, that it attracts everyone fascinated with nature, including bird lovers. Through the low Beskid mountains, the trail of migration stretches, so for over thirty years ornithologists are conducting their researches there. - We are at “Akcja Carpatica” camp, where we are catching birds for the twentieth time. It’s the twentieth season of studies of birds migrations just right there at Beskid Niski, around the Myscowa village. We have one hundred mist-nets altogether, placed at all spots. It’s rather a big amount, but it gives us desired effects, if it comes to numbers of caught birds. Functioning of the camps strongly depends on the count of the crew. Everyone has their own tasks, their own duties. Dinner has to be made, someone has to wash the dishes. There must be designated people, who will do the rounds every hour. - This morning we were sitting, and suddenly some man riding a bike asked us: “gentleman, may I ask you to come over there for a moment?” We came out expecting a request for 5 Złoty, or a beer, and he straight goes like: “Don’t you want to buy a goat?” We liked it. Kasia also said, that it’s likely pregnant. Unfortunately I haven’t heard that. - He also touched it, and stated that it will be a billy. - Yes. We are expecting, that when we wake up tomorrow, 
there will be a small goat running around the camp. It’s slowly getting used to us. It’s name’s Iskra (Spark). - We are in the Magurski National Park, specifically in its buffer zone. Behind us, we can see a mountain called Kamień (Stone). It’s mostly an area of strict protection. These areas are protecting the last remnants of Carpathian primeval forest, beech forests with an admixture of the fir which is a typical forest habitat in the Carpathians. - Oh, I think that’s a Lesser Spotted Eagle. But it’s far away, at large height. You can tell by characteristically arched wings. They are arched downwards, this is how You distinguish a Lesser Spotted Eagle from a Golden Eagle. More and more bird`s enthusiasts arrive to Magurski National Park. Whether they’re called Birdwatchers, or bird lovers. Mentioned eagles: Lesser Spotted Eagle and Golden Eagle, are our flagship species over here. You don’t have to try hard to see Lesser Spotted Eagle there. All you have to do is to take a few-hour walk around April, August or on the beginning of September, and you will probably see some of them, and surely you will hear at least a few. Lesser Spotted Eagle is quite active vocally. There won’t be any problems with it. It’ll be little harder with Golden Eagle which is very rare in our country. Here we have two territories of this species and to see it You need more luck. It would be best to go around village of Myscowa, which is located outside the National Park. And above that town, above the Wisłoka valley, above the nearby meadows and pastures, Golden Eaglefly relatively often. We protect these forests, not only because of the forest itself, but also because of animals that inhabit them. Starting from small passerines, such as Collared Flycatcher, Red-breasted Flycatcher, White-backed Woodpecker, or there where’s more fir, even Three-toed Woodpecker. Through owls, that is: Pygmy Owl, Tengman’s Owl, until lager birds. As it comes to owls, Ural Owl is currently the most numerous owl in Beskid Niski. - The most important thing at ringing camp is the safety of birds. Birds are pulled out of the nets. Pulling the bird out usually takes several seconds. Sometimes three seconds. Sometimes it takes up to a minute, if the bird is tangled. Then it’s placed into special bag and transported. The bag is airy, and it’s quite dark inside, so bird’s the stress will be reduced. And of course, after taking to the camp, 
we’re doing best we can to finish the procedures as soon as possible. We take biometrical measurements, and ring the bird. Then it is being released. - At 17:00 o’clock: k3, X07, 42, re-trapped - Catching in the mistnets is safe for birds. If the rounds are properly concentrated, that’s like every hour in good conditions. When it’s heavy raining, or sun is blazing the rounds will be more frequent, or the nets will be closed. - We catch highest amounts of birds in hours between six and nine at the morning. In the afternoon, the second wave is coming from seventeen to eighteen. That’s when the most of birds are being caught. - 95% of the area of the Magurski National Park is covered with forests. The rest, almost 5% are the meadows and pastures. The Park mows and grazes these areas with sheep or cows, to preserve these open landscapes. Not only the forests, but also open landscape, for the panoramic and most importantly - natural reasons. Nature hates compromises. We protect it, or we don’t. In places where we want to protect it, human must make concessions. Sadly people often do not realise, that it’s the heritage of their whole country, and wider, even whole Europe. It’s easier than we think to protect nature. All we have to do is to leave it alone, and it will take care of herself, especially in places untouched by human hands. PART III Poland. A real paradise for birds lovers. We are begging our adventure at its northern edge, where Sobieszewska Island lies. In summer, first ferry arrives here just after sunrise. From there, it’s only a few kilometres of walk to the Mewia Łacha Nature Reserve, where the Water bird Research Group „Kuling” builds their cabin every year. - We are at the mouth of Vistula river, exactly around breakwaters leading a river to the sea. - Hello. Anything interesting? Any birds? - Welcome, everything’s fine. - When your round starts? - Well, they went out. The round has already begun, so we will wait for birds. Crew is coming back. In special baskets they’re carrying birds caught into walk-in traps. Caught birds can’t wait too long, so under a watchful eye of supervisor, the ringing begins. - I’m a ringer on Kuling camps for over twenty years. Kuling started to use these plastic rings on waders 
because they’re making reading them a lot easier for observers. Lately we all have a high quality cameras, scopes, so a lot of people enjoy reading these rings. We don’t have to catch that bird again, and we can easily read it’s number that allows us to know it’s history, without even scaring that animal. Then this number goes to the special database, so we can learn about its life history. - And there, where are these sticks? It’s also a nest or not? - Just over here. You can see two eggs. That’s Little Tern nest. - They’re being hatched, despite the cluch is not full. - Yes, they’re only two. But it’s twelfth day, so they will hatch out soon enough. - It’s one of a few nests. It’s a bad season for Terns, because of large amounts of predators at the other side of Vistula. Unfortunately Foxes and Racoon Dogs started to come earlier, and we couldn’t exterminate them successfully, so the whole colony got away. The only successful broods to the moment of incubation were here, at the headland. Only trained crew of Kuling are allowed to move around the Reserve. This season, to protect Ringed Plover broods from predators, Kuling is using special baskets. - Ah, it’s beginning. It pretends to have broken wings. Plover is getting away from us, trying to distract us from the nest. Distracting’s aim is to get any predator away from the nest, by getting away from it and pretending to for example have a broken wing. The predator will think it’s an easy prey, so it will start to chase a bird. - And the nest remains safe.
- Yes. Nest remains safe. - Here we can see the nest inside the basket. There are four eggs, so it’s a full clutch. Now we will start to get away rather quickly, to not worry the bird further, so it can return and hatch the eggs. - It’s another pair of Terns. - Waders are a very interesting group, primarily because of their longest migrations of all birds in the world. Our rings were read even in Mauritania. But the longest ones were to Ghana and South Africa. It’s a few thousands kilometres from the place where they were ringed. If we imagine from where these birds are flying, somewhere from Siberia, these birds can fly up to twelve thousands kilometres in one migration. Stops are a very important elements of migration. During them, the birds can rest and feed in order to gain strength for further journey. Here, at Vistula’s river mouth, we have a Reserve which we are closing from tourists, so birds can gather these resources in peace, and then deal with their further flight. - I’m an educator here, and my job here is to teach tourists. On the observation platform I show them what’s there in the Reserve, I tell them about our duties, and what and how we are protecting. A lot of people asks me if it is true that it’s really forbidden to enter there, because they would love to have a short walk there. I certainly explain them, how important it is to not disturb structure of the Reserve. Meanwhile, during the round, a surprise awaits Ania and Andrzej. - We have two chicks of Little Tern, I’ll go for the rings and get back soon as I can. - They’re perfectly adapted to hide within a sand. It seems that it’s rather flat there, without any grasses, so they would be easy to find. But if we released them right now, and they got away, I think it would be a huge problem to find them. - The chicks are already big enough to be ringed. The second chick is also ringed. It will be free in a moment. - Are we releasing them together?
- Yes. Breeding season is ongoing, so we shouldn’t be here. But presence of the camp with people, which is scaring foxes leads first broods to be successful. All May and June, these chicks weren’t hatching, because they were eaten. And now we’ve got a camp here for around two and half week, and two broods have already hatched. These are birds which laid eggs at the beginning of camp. - There are another two birds. Yes, two Dunlins in a walk-in trap. Vistula river mouth is a very precious place for birds, substantially every season. At the moment we are having a very specific period of time, because the breeding season is still ongoing, so there are birds which use these terrains to breed. But for other species, migration has already begun. We are mainly talking about birds flying from North 
and North-East and we are observing these among others. These traps, which we are setting here at camp, are used to catch waders. There aren’t many places like Mewia Łacha Nature Reserve left in Poland. It’s a tiny piece of land left to a nature. But isn’t it to small? Would human pressure become too strong there? People often accuse us of closing that beach for ourselves. Actually closing a terrain, not letting people in guarantees these birds some peace, for example to stop during their migration. We all must realize, that protection of these places doesn’t allow compromises. Tourism must be controlled, and presence of Kuling’s crew is its best guarantee. Today we say goodbye to Kuling’s camp and Vistula river mouth, but we will return soon to uncover more secrets of this place. From Sobieszewska Island we move to the east. To Podlasie, where together with Pawel from Eagle Conservation Commitee, we are heading in the direction of wet forest. - Hi
- Great, I’m looking forward to our job. Where is that nest? This way? - Nest is very close, in this forest, in some kind of swampy lowering, hidden in spruce. Wet Podlasie’s forests are magical place. Lesser Spotted Eagles eagerly build their nests here. Mostly close to the edge of forests, surrounded by meadows, close to their feeding grounds. Protecting birds of prey, including the Lesser Spotted Eagle, is the Eagle Conservation Committee’s task. - Let it be romantic. I launch myself across the dry and open narrows. My carriage plunging into green as if a ketch, Floundering through the meadow flowers in the stretch. I pass anarchipelago of coraly arrows.. At Eagle Conservation Commitee, we mostly take care of birds of prey, but also of owls and Black Stork. We mostly work with the zone protection and monitoring of birds of prey, that is, searching for rare species. - You said that it’s here. - Two chicks are hatching right now. - Montagu’s Harriers are making their nests on the ground, usually in cereal fields. We are trying to find that kind of broods before the harvest. We often ask owners of these lands for permission to secure these nests, or for a little delay of harvests. - We are ringing today, are we? - That’s our goal. I hope the chick will be there, I’ve checked the nest and it’s occupied, and if everything went fine we will find a chick to ring there. - And what, is it here? - Here. The nest is barely visible. On the top of that spruce. It’s one of the best nests, because every year we can find a young bird here. Presence of the chick is evidenced by fresh droppings, and adult Lesser Spotted Eagles do not defecate near their nests. - There’s one or two chicks? - It’s quite early, so theoretically there it’s possible to find two chicks here. But cainism, when an older and stronger chick kills a weaker siblings occurs early, so I’d rather expect to find one bird here. One time I had an occasion to see a cainism. The older chick, which was around two and half week tormented a younger one. Younger’s head was covered in blood, and the eye was missing. Quite a sad view. But it’s natural for Lesser Spotted Eagles. It’s a huge species, the chick weight around 1500 grammes. So in 8 weeks Lesser Spotted Eagle have to raise a 1500 gramme chick, 
feeding it small prey such as voles, amphibians and other chicks. -  Now it knows that we are here, but it sometimes responds from far away. That’s how I found the nest. I heard the chick, because the nest was too hard to see. While finding a new position, we apply to Regional Directorate 
of Environmental Protection for creating so-called protection zones. These are areas, where birds aren’t disturbed. Year-round zone secures all tree stand, chosen by the birds for a nest. That is about one or two hundred meters of area around the nest, depends on the species. But partial protection zone, is a much larger area, but it’s functioning only in a breeding season. - It’s still small, so it doesn’t resist at all. It’s probably around 3 weeks old. There’s no second chick in the nest, and there aren’t any traces or shells. It’s hard to say if there were two eggs, or only one, both options are possible for Lesser Spotted Eagles. We usually put two rings on them. One is standard ornithological metal ring, the second one is a colourful plastic ring for reading. - I can see it’s getting rid of down feathers. - Yes, that’s why we can see down in the nest. If there’s much of it, it means that the bird was medium sized, and changed its plumage. Down is well visible on resin trees, such as spruces. It sticks to them, so we are able to tell if the chick was there even in December. This red colour is reserved for Lesser Spotted Eagles in Poland. Short three-digit code. We are often able to read it from the photos, even of birds in flight. - It will of course try to defend itself a little. It’s big enough to recognize threats, but his defence won’t be enough at the moment. If it comes to Lesser Spotted Eagles, we know a lot about their migrations thanks to telemetry. For me, really precious information are about natal dispersal, 
a distance between eagle’s place of hatch to its first nesting site. It’s very interesting, eagles are long distance migrants. Their migrations can be up to eleven thousands kilometres, 
to place like South Africa and they always return close to their birth place. The chick is being ringed. It has little time to put on some weight and grow feathers. From hatching to flying from nest, about fifty days passes. Young Lesser Spotted Eagle is up to one more difficult task - he must learn how to fly and hunt. Between August and September he will experience an unusual feeling. It will be a migratory restlessness, which will force it to fly southwards, to distant wintering grounds. - It’s amazing, that non-flying chick which is lying ahead of us, 
at the end of September should be somewhere in Africa. - Well I guess he won’t be in Africa at the end of September, 
that’s the time when he will just begin his journey. He’ll maybe be somewhere in Near East. - We should put him back as fast as possible. - He began to call. - You’re going up with me. - All the best. - Average breeding success is around 70%. It’s not much, but I think not more than 50% of birds will survive first winter. With every next year the survival change is getting bigger, but sadly many of them won’t make it to their first reproduction 
which occurs when they are around five years old. The chick must return to its nest as soon as possible. There’s a parent calling his offspring nearby. Young Lesser Spotted Eagle’s well-being is a priority for ornithologist. There we say goodbye to our young hero. Maybe we will meet again somewhere at extensive meadows of Podlasie, Lubelszczyzna, or Carpathans. Rings which it received will allow us to identify him. PART IV Urban jungle. Birds found their place here with extraordinary easiness. High blocks, industrial buildings, mine chimneys; they are all places they eagerly use. Variety of birds which got used to live in the city is impressive. Jays, Starlings, Blackbirds, Collared Doves, Magpies, Jackdaws and Black Redstarts. But there’s only one hero of urban sky. Often mistaken with a swallow – the Swift, which liked tall blocks of huge metropolises. - We are going to check if Swifts are in their nest boxes. In this area we have a lot of insulated buildings. When the blocks are being insulated, they lose their breeding places. As a compensation, we place nest boxes here. It’s late afternoon, early evening - the best time to watch Swifts. They should be getting back from their hunting grounds in a moment. - Swifts are amazing birds living almost everywhere among us, which we often don’t realize. Well, we see some black birds flying overhead and screaming, but we don’t know what exactly it is. Many people thinks that they’re black swallows, but it isn’t true. Swallows or House Martins can also live in a buildings - if they are living in a settlements. They are similar to Swifts, but they aren’t ones. Swifts belong to an different order of birds, they have sickle-like wings, and in contrast to Swallows, they’re whole black or dark brown. Swallow’s belly area is clearly white, while Swift’s remains dark. - Nest boxes are made especially for Swifts are hung on the highest storeys, where nothing sticks out beneath them. When they fly away from nest box, they can jump out of the box, catch air under their wings and begin their flight. Because they’re one of best fliers if it comes to birds, they spent most of their lives in air. For Swifts looking at the world from above, high blocks resemble mountain ridges. It’s a species which used to live only in highest trees or rocky parts of the mountains. Today it’s a bird associated with cities, and it’s sounds are often used in romantic comedies, or other movies taking place in an urban jungle. - Alright, we’ll look somewhere else. - That’s a block we need to check. There we also have new, pretty nest boxes. Birds will have a place to live. During a thermomodernization there was a suspicion that there’s a nest in a gap. Ornithologist supervising the construction had to check that. - Thanks
- This way - I must realize what am I seeing. - It seems that nothing is here. You can’t see any traces or anything. I’ve made it to the top and I can’t see nothing. If they weren’t here we would be eaten alive by mosquitoes, or we would need to spray chemicals, which is not good. - Something invented that balance.
- Exactly. Everything is for something. Unfortunately human can shake this balance, but nature will be fine. The less we interfere, the better. - In 2012 we made a decision about thermomodernization 
of 120 buildings placed in theneighbourhood where we are currently at. To keep the records and laws about building 
and protection of nature we had to investigate local birds. Open holes between large-plate buildings are perfect habitats for Swifts. Ventilated and holed flat roofs are also making a perfect habitats, if birds can get to them. The best pleasure of this summer were the messages from residents, who can relax at their balconies afternoon, without need to chase away the mosquitoes. - From flying from the nest to about 2 years, a Swift spends almost all his time in air. First in Poland, Europe, and then in the middle of August he flies to Africa. They often fly around all the Africa and a part of an ocean, while hunting, eating and sleeping in air. Then it gets back to us next spring, usually in May, and it’s still flying around without nesting. In their second year of life they are looking for appropriate place for a nest. - At the moment we have many buildings around us, which Swifts visualize as rocks. That’s why there’s so many of them in our cities. They’re using our blocks and buildings instead of rocks. That phenomenon is called synurbization. - Sometimes it is quiet here all day, because they are flying somewhere else. Sometimes even several dozen of kilometres from their nests. They can fly from several to hundreds of kilometres chasing insects or other invertebrates, catching them with their huge mouths. During 24 hours they can catch to several thousand mosquitoes. - Birds adapted well to the urban jungle. Some of the birds even took advantage of us living in that, not other places. They’re using blocks as their nesting place, and they’re doing well, but with our help they can do even better. Gdańsk Bay, one of the most attractive places for birdwatchers. Birds are intensively migration here at spring and autumn, and from December to March, species from the North winters here: Auks, ducks and loons. Nothing unusual that birders have sentiments to this place. For birdwatchers, the best attractions are winter cruises for birds. They’re giving a chance to see observe species wintering at the sea, away from shore. The group usually hires a small boat. You have to deal with cold, rain and often sea sickness. It’s a kind of extreme observations. - Samek! Why is there so little Common Scoters? - Common Scoters are rather at the West.
- We see a lot of Velvet Scoters, Long-tailed Ducks, but few Common Scoters. - During these days, we haven’t seen one. - Further you can see a lot of them, towards a Szczecin or Świnoujście, on Zdenek’ grounds. I always want a whole black duck with white neck. I’ll be happy then. Remember, if you see one, let me know. - And if I see one with something orange? - No, no, no. I don’t want that kind of duck. - Aren’t these Auks? - Auks! On the One o’clock! - You know, it’s hard to keep camera in place, it’s rather heavy. - Great Crested Grebe at Twelve o’clock. It’s swimming. - Adam heard from some fisherman, that he went far from shore 
and saw some kind of small penguin near a boat. I suppose it was the Little Auk, what else it could be? And Adam told him, that it was Auk. And the fisherman responded, “Man, it wasn’t an Auk, I know how they look like That bird was two times smaller than an Auk”. So we suppose it was a Little Auk. Storm on Baltic. The best weather for birdwatchers. The stronger it is, the better. That’s our chance to see even very rare species that have lost the battle with winds. - We’re leading observation at sea, which is specific form of birdwatching known as seawatching. It’s an unusual activity for ornithologists. It strongly depends on atmospheric and weather conditions. North, North-western winds makes birds willing to migrate, 
and push them close enough for us to see them. Those aren’t very close distances so seawatching is rather harder than regular birdwatching. You must act rather quickly, which takes a lot of experience and knowledge. And weather conditions themselves. Wind makes everything harder, and it’s cold out there, but it’s worth it. - I have some nice photos. I’ll check them later. It’s fine at the moment. They went to the other side. Keep your heads down, I can’t catch anything. There aren’t a lot of birds. Somewhere single Velvet Scoters passes by. I can’t see many Long-tailed Ducks. And these seagulls - I can watch them at my hometown! - These are Long-tailed Ducks. Aren’t they? - Observing birds at the sea, unlike the other type 
of the observations can bring us species generally hard to see. In planning seawatching, tracking atmospheric conditions is very important. You need to catch the storm, because it gives best conditions for interesting observation. You must do it every day, to predict which day would be the best. Good conditions, like these today attracts many people. Even people from all parts of Poland, hoping to stand somewhere there, at the Vistula spit and hope to see Skuas, Shearwaters, or Kittiwakes. Often sight of crowd withscopes on the beach arouse interest among tourists and passers-by. They always think that we are making some 
kind of movie or looking out for maneuvers of the navy. As they find out, that we are watching birds, which is less spectacular for them, they are amazed, that we can stand there in really bad weather 
and watch for something that will fly far from shore. But in order to know what it really is, you have to taste it once. PART V In the last part, we are trying 
to answer question we ask ourselves from the beginning. What is and where it comes from – the passion of watching birds. It’s a story about young, but experienced birder, ornithologist and birdwatcher. Exactly, about who? - At the moment birds are more than a passion to me. It’s some kind of addiction - a positive one. I don’t think I could live without it. I can clearly see it when I’m busy for some days and can’t go to the field when I have to study, attend family meetings, or when I’m just ill. I’m constantly nervous. I miss something during the day. Birdwatcher is a person who devotes his time to watch birds, is fascinated by birds, ready to take time just to see them. To see as many as he can find. A kind of person who wants to spend as much time as he can with them, ready to travel hundreds of kilometres, just to see a group of gooses. There’s much more to tell. Umm, wait I don’t know how to say it right. At University of Gdansk we have plenty of ornithologists. And plenty of birdwatchers. Many people, who give their lives to observing and studying birds. It’s a place where organizations like Kuling or Action Baltic have their headquarters. The group I surround myself with, almost every one of them is related to birds. I assume that friendship, or other relationships with people 
who don’t share your passion may end sooner or later. I’m not alone at the university. Beside me others are studying here, for example Marta or Marcin, so apart from all professors and doctors, I know people who I can go out with. It’s good for us because we are motivating each other. - 1, 1, 3, 3, 8, 0, 13 - It’s kind of… - Strange?
- Yeah, strange. Well… - There’s 0, 0. Female. Age: i. Species: Pa maj. Fat: 2. - Do you remember that Buzzard and Sparrowhawk caught in the net?
- Yeah, he ran left and right. - I took a Goshawk and Cuckoo from here once. It’s a nice net. I feel like a birdwatcher and a ringer at the same time. I connect these two fields in one piece, and it’s the best thing for me. It’s my passion, something that I love and will never abandon. It’s what I love. I’m holding a bird in a safe position, where head is placed between middle and pointing finger, and the rest of body is gently covered. We can move other body parts freely. The wing is very important in determining the age, there we look at greater coverts and primary coverts. It’s about a so-called contrast. Edge of these coverts are blue – the same as in greater ones, their tips are round, which suggests that the bird is adult. It’s an adult male of the Great Tit. We can tell by its black belly patch getting bigger while closer to tail. If it was a female, the belly patchwould be shorter and a little white. Male’s head is also metallic black, in case of female it’s feathers are white-edged. That’s how it looks like. Alright, we’re letting him go. The topic of ringing is rather a controversial one, but often because lack of knowledge. Sometimes when we are catching seagulls or ducks in Gdynia’s boulevard, people passing by asks us what, and why, are we doing this. And it’s very good. It’d be worse if they didn’t care, if the lives of birds animals were indifferent for them. I personally haven’t experienced any aggression from people while doing my work. - September 13, 7 o’clock. 1,53. - That how he sounds?
- Yes, it’s his contact call. We have also got many visitors at our camps. Not only adults, but children too, who come with their parents or other guardians. They’re my favourite group of listeners. They’re often coming while we are ringing, and I take care of them, talk with them, and let them watch the birds at close range. They’re our future. Who will be later ringing and observing these birds, if not them? These things are simple matters, which must be taken care of now, not later. - I’ll write down every bird we got. - You will dig.
- Fair. -That’s our famous toilet sign. There you go, free, and, taken. Quick service course. -There’s a huge contrast, when we are all together. We’re facing different situations within weeks, sometimes getting mad at each other. Some enjoy the food, some not, so small conflicts are often there. But it teaches us cooperation with others, not only at camps, but also in everyday situations. It’s a huge contrast, while you are seeing all these people at studies, 
normally dressed, not in all these dirty boots and trousers. -That’s a huge piece of history.
- Indeed it is. - You can compare their old look with todays. -That’s the first action notebook, back from 1960, while it wasn’t even called Action Baltic. It was one-time event, led by biology students from University of Warsaw. They placed few nets around reserve called Ptasi Raj (Bird’s Paradise). It wasn’t even a reserve back then. That’s what’s written here: Birds caught in nets, Górki Wschodnie, September 11-24th. A normal, checked notebook, everything written with pencil. There’s first bird. Here you are. - That’s amazing. - It’s Little Stint
- Then it’s a Robin - If it comes to identifying birds, there was, I don’t know, maybe 1 guide for whole Europe. There was no Svensson, or anything we use these days back then. - Everything was being invented. - Our boys had to learn all of this by themselves. Well, our girls too of course, there weren’t just boys. - It began with this. I will take our last notebook. It’s our latest L, from Bukowo, now you have comparison, how it looked then, and how it looks today. - Wing 261 - No, there you write EU Q1, then A
- Okay. I will correct the ring a little. - It’s my first bird, that I took out of the walk-in trap, black-headed gull At the moment of observation, we don’t pay attention to details, unless we hold them in our hands. Then we can see all their body parts, feathers, and that’s when we examine their age, sex. Many species are hard to recognize in the field, if It comes to their gender and age. But if you are holding them, it all becomes easy. - Everything is clear. An adult bird, without any brown scales. - Tertial coverts, lesser and median. - Okay. So? Three gulls for the photo for the website? - Do you have that plastic covered?
- I do - Alright. Enough for today. - It would be great if you brought me a frying pan. - The deep one?
- Yes, I need to fry onions. - What’s that knife for? - Agata told that she counted and it was ok. - Were you digging?
- We are still, but I need some water. - You sweat so badly.
- Yeah - Alvaro in the shirt? Like a corporate worker! - I react really allergically to a word hobby. You can collect stamps as a hobby. Ornithology it`s a sense of life. It`s a vocation. It’s something I think about during a day, and dream during nights. It will power me until death, this is not an single episode in my life. - I think tomorrow will be fine. Last few days were stormy, so a lot of birds will be flying after its end. We have few hours, when birds can move within hundreds of kilometres. - How many hours you were driving to see the Caspian Plover this year? - Well, I’ll categorise it as mental illness. - We were in Tatra Mountains, we were watching birds at Koscieliska Valley, and then, when Szymon joined us, we got a message about presence of Caspian Plover. I remember, that I looked at Werka and said: Damn, that’s the bird I must see. We’ve arrived at campsite, packed our bags, and ran to the bus heading toward Łódź. We’ve arrived around 2 A.M., Sławek picked us, and our five went to see Caspian Plover, somewhere near Gdansk. - So what? To the station?
- We’d need 5 minutes. - Alright Igor, I’m listening. - I think we should go right. - Further straight?
- Yeah. - Alright then. - In 450 meters, to the right.
- Okay. - 200 meters more. - We’ve got around 30 minutes until sunrise. - Maybe we’ll stop? - Quiet now. - Maybe the bird will move, so we can see it. Caspian Plover is a very hard animal to track. - Show me, Michaś. - Here I am. - Oh there, is it. - There is it.
- Excellent. - Now it looked slightly to the left. Foraged a bit. - Hi, anything good?
- Everything’s fine. - We got it. - Samuel, which species of yours it is? - 310 - 310?
- Neatly. - 317.
- 310. - 318.
- 304. - First twitch by the sea?
- I’ve never been that far. - Samuel is a fine example. Yesterday at that hour he was climbing in the mountains. - If you ever go to Pustkowo, there’s exact replica of Giewont’s cross. - And for what did I came to these mountains… - You can go during one day to the same cross. - You still have sea and other mountains to see. - You know, while twitch, there is always the risk that… Well that the bird won’t be there. - You will travel kilometres, lie to your wife, - Then you lie to your boss and get fired and you’re be late 5 minutes for the bird. - I think every one of us had a situation like this. 
- You have to deal with this. - Today we all have so called lifer, in birders language, simple kick in the ass. - One unslept night. One day of vacation less. Why? Because we were doing a twitch. We went to see a bird that appeared suddenly, and is very rare. First for Poland Caspian Plover in Łaszka, at Pomerania. We went 580 kilometres from Katowice, and in few moments, we will need to beat these kilometres again in order to get back. But it was worth it. Despite the foggy, cold morning, the bird was twitched. Besides that, there were a lot of people from all over Poland. All of them had similar story to ours. Many kilometres travelled just to see that bird. - People often ask us: why birds? Why not mammals, or the reptiles? Why not plants? Our basic and biggest argument is, that these creatures can travel unimaginable distances, without any support. They don’t need any maps or GPS. Sometimes we can even get lost in our cities, and birds 
can travel thousands of kilometres, making it to their direction. For example our Storks- they’re flying to South, and from there, they’re flying back directly to their nests. It’s something amazing. Ornithologists aren’t a kind of people sitting in one place, waiting for these birds, spending their time in a boring way. They’re people leading active lifestyle. It’s a life full of emotions and adventures. You will discover many people and places living like this. And there, we need to acknowledge people, tell them, that these birds, which are unimportant and unnecessary for them, can become something more. They can become their passions, something that would change their lives for the better. You become weirdo while breaking the mould. You are someone else in society, unfortunately people are living like moths day by day. Not all of them, but there’s plenty of people without any passions, goals, who don’t even try to find them. I’m trying to live like there’s no tomorrow, but I already have plans for years ahead. These plans are of course linked to birds, and I’m sure that it won’t change. In 10, 20, 30 years I will still go to the field, you will still meet me ringing at the Spit or at Hel in October. These are priorities, which I will never give up. - Pass it on. - It can be found in Poland, in many places. - Roman Snail.
- It is indeed, a Roman Snail, Helix pomatia. - What about nervous system, how does it look like? Is it centralized with many ganglia. And what kind of ganglia are they? - Cerebral? Visceral? - Yes. There can also be parietals and sides. It depends on group, but indeed, it’s mostly centralized and ganglia-based. - I often hear in my life, that I should calm down with all these birds. It’s like a cage for me. I don’t like being in such a situations. I feel a lot better there, at the camp, sleeping months under the tent, sitting all days in home staring at TV. It’s definitely not for me. The world goes forward, faster than ever. We have less and less time to breathe. We don’t look at the sky. We don’t live by the rhythm of the nature. Closed in the jungle of concrete we forget how many joy can sunrise, fog swimming around mountain valley, or geese flying on the autumn sky above us. Those who felt passion for birds inside, 
found something, something unusual - a key for being happy.|||This video has been made possible by the Great Courses Plus. Use the link below or head to the Great Courses Plus/Sweeney for your free one-month trial and to show your support for the channel, stick around to find out more. If you live in Central or Eastern Europe, you probably grew up hearing the folk tale of the three brothers Lech, Czech, and Rus: the three legendary patriarchs of the Slavic peoples. Allowed on a hunting trip the brothers had a disagreement, as brothers do, on which prey to follow, leading them to split up. Czech, the eldest of the brothers, follows prey to the Czech lands Rus, the youngest, went east and became the founder of Russia, and Lech, in the middle founded Poland, because who cares about consistency? The tale differs slightly from place to place, but many include that Lech travelled north as he followed a beautiful white eagle. The eagle landed in its nest at sunset and looked very breathtaking against the red sky. Lech took this for an omen and decided that the land would be his new home. The white eagle is still the symbol of Poland, blazoned against the red sky their flag. Indeed, Poland did begin with Slavic settlements. The Slavs are likely a civilization that emerged as remnants of the early Indo-European peoples who had migrated out of the Caucasus. From their homeland in Central Europe they began to expand and migrate in response to the weakening of the Roman Empire. (You'll remember this from previous episodes as the Great Migration Period.) The Poles loved their new home, which they shared with Germanic tribes from Scandinavia and the occasional Asian nomadic raiders. The Slavs of Poland were organized into smaller tribes living in and around the Baltic Sea and the Vistula river delta. They united under Poland's first official leader, Mieszko. Mieszko was the duke of the Polans This was a good gig to have since the tribe eventually became the name of the whole country: Poland. Mieszko was a member of the noble house of Piast; his dynasty would rule Poland for centuries. With his baptism in 966 A.D., the country slowly abandoned traditional Slavic paganism and adopted western Christianity. Mieszko's son Bolesław the Brave expanded the territory south into what he hoped would be a strong regional power, but, alas, it was a bit too early for that still. He established the metropolitan see at Gniezno, forming the headquarters of what would become the Catholic Church in Poland. His consolidation of power led him to be crowned Poland's first official king, and then he died, all in the same year. (Which is great.) The Piast dynasty was somewhat up and down and internal conflicts often plagued the royal court. Till this guy, Casimir the Restorer, restored the monarchy's control, which, come to think of it, is probably why they called him "the Restorer"? He modernized Poland into a feudalistic society, which came with all these cool things like knights and lords and castles. This helped to secure the borders, which up until now had changed depending on who was king. The early kingdom, somewhat weaker than his neighbours and strapped for cash, did however hold the Mongol invasion into Europe, having been sacked twice before. Notable of this time was the Polish relationship with the Germans, whose dukes and lords had come to possess large amounts of the west, and the Teutonic Knights, who had carved out a significant state for themselves in Livonia and Prussia, a land inhabited by Pagans, frequently raided by crusaders. By the time Piast rule ended with Casimir the Great, Poland had lost much of its territory to its neighbours. But, with a period of peace, the state soon began to prosper and attract Jewish settlement. The counties in this area became a source of contention between the kings of Poland and the Holy Roman Empire. Who fought over the local lords for fealty and allegiance. This resulted in these counties being very mixed, with populations of people from both kingdoms; the whole thing was very unbohemian, really. The Jews first settled in Poland as merchants on popular trade routes. By this century the Jewish people had settled in great numbers over many kingdoms in Europe and began their long and very sad history. They were expelled by the masses in all the countries they settled in and were often victims of massacres, and worse, crusades. Successive expulsions led the population in Poland to swell, which was a comparatively more tolerant society, which became a centre of Judaic learning and culture as the centuries continued. However, things weren't always super peachy and anti-Jewish riots often erupted in Polish towns, and synagogues were frequently burned. King Casimir the Great, dying without an heir, left his kingdom to his nephew Lewis, the king of Hungary. Lewis left his now three kingdoms to his daughters, one of whom died unexpectedly, the other, who was supposed to inherit Poland but inherited Hungary instead, and the last one, Jadwiga, who got Poland. The nobles of Poland welcomed Louis's daughter and crowned her king... Yes, king, not queen. Don't ask. Jadwiga's life would not be unlike a medieval television drama as she was simultaneously engaged to both a grand duke of Lithuania Jogaila, whose Kingdom was huge and powerful, and the Habsburg duke of Austria, who was inbred... and fat. I think she made the right choice. The union of Jadwiga and Władysław formed the Polish-Lithuanian union, which is now the largest country in Europe under a single monarchy. The Lithuanians had become a strong military power in the previous century,  capturing large amounts of Russian and Mongol land. The now combined countries spread from the Baltic to the Black Sea. The Lithuanians, with their far smaller population, never ventured too far from their castles--why would you?--and preferred to rule Ruthenia from Livonia instead. So by the time of the Union, the much larger Polish population came to dominate the Ruthenian lands, spreading their language and their culture, and eventually dwarfing their Livonian allies. The Teutonic Order, that German state on the Baltic, had become somewhat of a bad neighbour, leading raids, crusades, and plundering castles, or otherwise stumbling drunk into Polish-Lithuanian territory, starting fires and whatnot. The union of the two states proved beneficial, handing the Knights a crushing defeat of the Battle of Grunwald in 1410; they also fought numerous wars with the Muscovites, Tatars, and Ottomans. Noteworthy of the galleon period was the efficiency of the feudal system and the pseudo democratic nature of the parliament, who set up sophisticated bureaucracy for king approval (or disapproval, if you are unlucky). Within just a few decades, the Teutonic Order had completely lost their state, with the western half being annexed directly into Poland and the rest becoming a fief to the Polish Crown. This gave access of Poland to the prosperous Baltic seaports and an explosion in trade (keep your eye on this it becomes important later). The Prussian fief would later be inherited by Duke from Brandenburg estate within the Holy Roman Empire. A trend which would become ever more troublesome as lords within the HRE would increasingly inherit lands outside the imperial borders. The HRE was weird. Don't worry about it. :D Acquiring Danzig, or Gdańsk, had huge economic benefits and cities swelled in size in response to the trade boom, like Poznań, Lwów and the capital Kraków, and most notably Warsaw. Warsaw, or Warszawa in Polish, was up to this point just a small fishing village. Legend has it that a fisherman named Wars happened upon a mermaid in the Vistula river named Sawa. The two married and founded the town of Warszawa. The Poles, like most Europeans, were often embroiled in wars and this made famous their heavy cavalry, the Winged Hussars (which I'm sure I'll mobbed and lynched if I don't talk about...). Initially a contingent of Hungarian mercenaries the Hussars soon became an elite shock cavalry so powerful they allowed the Poles to win many otherwise hopeless battles. The Hussars became the envy of Europe, the most powerful and disciplined heavy cavalry the Middle Ages had ever known and are still a matter of intense national symbolism of Poland. The sixteenth century was a really big one and included the protestant reformation affecting mostly German parts of the Kingdom, wars against the encroaching Ottomans invading Europe, advances in science and literature, with Copernicus devising the heliocentric model of the Solar System, the nationwide codification of the Polish language, and the biggest one, the changing of the Polish-Lithuanian union into the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth: a single political entity ratified by the Polish parliament, or Sejm, with elected rather than hereditary kings The Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, or just Poland for short, became a centre of power and commerce and a bulwark against invading Turks, who had become a larger and larger problem for the European powers since their humble beginnings in Central Asia. During the Polish-Muscovite war, the Poles became involved in the Russian succession crisis, or the Time of Troubles, and began flexing their muscles with their famous hussars. They even occupied Moscow for a short period but were soon driven out, because invading Russia is simply impossible, unless you are the Mongols. The series of Northern Wars and the Russo-Polish war left the Commonwealth in a very precarious and weakened state. This was aggravated by the election of Polish kings, which opened the door for other nations to meddle in Polish affairs. Which they did, a lot. During the wars the Commonwealth lost the territory of Livonia and was devastated by the so-called Swedish Deluge, leaving much of the nation in ruins. Poland became weakened during the Great Northern War against Sweden and during the War of the Polish Succession, it became increasingly clear that Poland's fate was going to be decided by its neighbors. The Polish parliament became ineffective due to complicated veto laws which made passing reforms or mounting resistance to invasion nothing if not impossible. The political limbo and the sheer size of the Commonwealth started to make cutting pieces out of it looked pretty attractive The last king of Poland, Stanislav II, was elected in 1764 as a puppet of the Russian Empire, aided greatly by the fact that he was in bed with Catherine the Great. Stanislav did attempt reform to try and save face but was aware the kingdom was on its last breath. Before long the First Partition of Poland was enacted, dividing the outlying provinces between Austria, Prussia, and Russia. In dire straits, the parliament was powerless to stop the invading troops and forced to ratify the new borders. The Great Sejm tried once more to reform by drafting a formal constitution inspired by the liberties of the French revolution, but it was enough to provoke Russia again, who saw France as an enemy and Poland as a sympathizer to anti-monarchic sentiments. Pro- and anti-constitutional forces became embroiled in a war and Russian forces invaded to broker a defeat to the republican movement. With an agreement signed with Prussia, the two nations annexed more territory in the Second Partition, reducing Poland to one-third its size and population. The king was horrifically unpopular, the army was in shambles, the parliament was divided and powerless. The common people were furious and insurrections led to the national rebellion led by the military veteran Tadeusz Kościuszko. After an initial success, the rebels failed to garner support from many other nations and were defeated by the surrounding powers. In 1795, the Austrians, Prussians and Russians decided to put an end to the rebellious Poles and invaded them from three sides. The Third Partition of Poland, as it became known, wiped Poland off the face of the map for the next century. Millions of Poles now found themselves subject to whichever nation they were divided into, isolated from one another; and Poland ceased to exist. Now as you all know if you've ever picked up a map Poland did indeed return as a sovereign nation. But we will have to get to all of that in part two. In the meantime, if you're interested in learning more, why not head over to the Great Courses Plus? Great courses plus is a subscription on-demand video learning service dedicated to bringing you the best in lectures from Ivy league University professors to National Geographic on a wide range of Topics. I personally recommend having a watch of "The Great Crime of Empires: Poland Divided", which is part of the course on the history of Eastern Europe. This video was highly inspired by this series and much of the research was done with their great lectures prices start as little as $14.99 a month and Sweeney viewers are offered a free one-month trial which they can access by heading to the great courses + sweeney or by clicking the Link below Do yourself a favor and check it out it really opened my eyes to the great crime of the polish partitions If you want to support the show directly you can head over to my patreon page Or follow me with all the usual social media down below until next time ~BRT|||and welcome back everybody it's sicaru here uh 
doing an exclusive video for youtube normally   of course i do a lot of streams on twitch we 
put them on youtube but based on the fact that   i am stuck here in poland i have not had great 
internet throughout my time i thought why not   do an opening video for youtube all right so 
so rather fittingly since i am in poland the   video we're going to do and do an opening on is 
the polish opening all right so without further   ado i will give you some background on this now 
the polish opening starts with the move 1b4 here   now the idea behind b4 is multi multi-purpose 
first of all white wants to create more space   than you would ordinarily with a move like b3 
here b3 is a move as well to go bishop to b2 um   but with b4 you potentially take more space in 
the center black not play for c5 d5 and so forth   now b4 has been a move that has been 
around for a very very long time   however it came back to prominence recently when 
magnus carlson the world chess champion started   playing it during the meltwater chess champions 
tour in 2021 therefore the first game we're going   to look at is a game that i played with the black 
pieces against magnus during during the champions   chess tour ftx crypto cup knockout all right so 
b4 is played by magnus i play e5 here bishop to   b2 play bishop takes b4 now one thing to note is 
even though i play this game with the black pieces   we are going to be looking at this from the white 
from the white side for the most part so bishop   takes b4 bishop takes e5 is played here now again 
black has many options here for example black and   play move like d6 maybe knight c6 or even queen 
e7 here but one big difference of course is   that with the pawn being on b4 versus say let's 
let's just say b3 for example as a um as a move   let's say white goes wait actually apparently i 
haven't figured this out um as far as why i can't   make uh make analysis anyway after bishop b2 if 
black plays knight c6 here white can now play b5   which attacks knight on c6 whereas at the pawn 
we're on b3 here it could not go forward to b5   so bishop b2 bishop takes before his play now 
this is considered the most principled approach   and after bishop takes e5 knight f6 is played 
now ordinarily it looks like if you if you go   according to the basic rules giving up a pawn 
on the side of the board for pawn in the center   should be favorable for white because having 
the pawns in the center is more important than   pawns on the edge of the board however in this 
situation black can play for quick development   and black can also try to stop white from playing 
d4 and c4 later on so c3 is played here by magnus   i play bishop to e7 and now magnus plays move pawn 
to e3 now this is a very unusual setup but as i   said before white would really like to take the 
center here but it's very hard to get the pawns   on e4 and d4 of course you play e4 here at some 
point black and castle and let's say you play   something like d3 after black plays a move like d5 
here this is very very bad for white the center is   collapsing immediately additionally you'll notice 
that here black has already castled the king out   of the center of the board and white still has not 
developed these three pieces the bishop the knight   and the rook on the king side so this would be 
very bad for white so therefore after bishop 7   how do you try to take the center so the way that 
you usually try to take the center is to play for   d4 and c4 as i alluded to earlier now again you 
do want to develop this bishop and there are   two ways to do it you can play e3 and something 
like bishop d3 or you can play something like g3   and bishop g2 now again we have many games to go 
through so we will see various different setups   i will add as well in future games we will see 
the lines with bishop a5 which i do believe   is a little bit more precise anyway bishop e7 e3 
is played by magnus i play c5 here trying to stop   white from playing playing for development in the 
center immediately so here magnus plays the move   bishop takes f6 now this is a very strange 
choice by magnus definitely not a move that   i would expect out of him but again we're sort 
of in unknown territory already and magus is a   straightforward concept of taking and playing 
g3 and fianchettoing his light square bishop   what you will notice however that's particularly 
strange is that white has played the movie e3 if   white would like to play g3 it would make a little 
bit more sense potentially to play g3 let's just   say d5 bishop takes f6 push takes off bishop g2 
followed by knight f3 without wasting a tempo on   pop on the move pawn to e3 so after e3 c5 i play 
fish takes f6 bishop f6 g3 played by magnus now   i go b6 the idea is that here because white has 
pushed the pawn to e3 i now want to play bishop   a6 and prevent the white king from castling out of 
the middle of the board so bishop g2 is played i   play knight c6 of course not d5 here if i play d5 
i'm a little bit worried that white might be able   to play knight to e2 here followed by knight f4 
and putting a lot of pressure on the pawn on d5   so therefore after bishop g2 i play the move 
knight to c6 d4 is played by magnus again now   it makes some sense as to why he played e3 upon 
e3 supports a pawn push in the center of the fort   so now i go bishop to a6 magnus plays knight e2 
of course not knight to f3 because now white will   never be able to cast the king out of the center 
of the board so 92 is played now here i castle   magnus castles and now i go rook e8 now again 
it would have been nice if i could have looked   for a tactic here i remember during the game i 
thought there might be some idea like pawn takes   pawn pawn takes and something like bishop takes 
e2 queen e2 knight takes d4 but unfortunately here   it doesn't quite work because after pawn takes 
knight bishop takes pawn white can simply take   the rook on a and after i take back on a8 white 
moves the knight to d2 and after bishop takes a1   brook takes the a1 white simply has an extra 
knight here and he's completely winning   so after castles i play the move work 
to e8 so after rook to e8 is played here   magnus now blunders he plays the move rook to e1 
already it's a little bit tricky here in terms of   how to how to play this position perhaps white 
can play something simpler like knight to d2   and after pawn takes d4 here y can take and after 
bishop takes queen takes now after the move knight   takes d4 which looks very flashy winning a pawn 
because of the pin white cannot capture back she   would take the queen white can very simply 
play a move like queen to g4 and he's still   attacking the rook on eight and after knight 
to c6 here why you can play rookie d1 and even   though white is down a pawn here there's a lot 
of pressure on the center of the board there's   pressure towards the pawn on d7 white can also 
play knight e4 and additionally this bishop on g2   also has a lot of great squares in here in the 
center of the board and there's also even 94   96 potentially so there's a lot of play for 
white here even though white has one less pawn so   instead magnus plays rookie one i play rook to c8 
and now he plays 83 which if this weren't magnus   you would think it's a fatal blunder of course 
being magnus there's still a lot of resources   that exist in the position now what here in 
this position it's already quite difficult   for white to play now you might wonder well why 
is it difficult what really changed after move   rook c8 and what change is that after white 
moves let's just say white plays like h3 for   uh for an example you can now actually not 
naturally let's say white plays with like knight   two for an example you can now take the pawn on 
d4 and after c takes d4 there's now knight to   b4 with the idea of knight c2 forking the rooks 
on e1 and a1 there's also the idea of maybe even   knight d3 and now the knight on b4 the bishop 
on a6 and the reconcile are all optimally placed   so magnus plays a3 here basically hoping for the 
idea that after takes takes let's say i take here   there's no knight before because the pawn prevents 
it however this is this is a mistake because after   a3 there's a tactic here so i go bishop takes 
e2 rook takes the e2 now i play pawn takes pawn   magnus takes back and now i have the move knight 
takes d4 now here you'll notice that the rook is   no longer on a either so there are no longer ideas 
where white can capture and therefore the tactic   works here so knight d4 pawn takes knight we 
trade on e2 i take on d4 and the problem for white   here is very simple in this position the rook is 
under attack there are no squares on this this uh   back rank because the knight is in the way so you 
can't bring the rook to the center of the board   as you move the rook to a2 here which happens in 
the game of course now i play the move work to   c1 check attacking the king and the knight 
at the same time so magnus plays bishop f1   i take the knight and now magnus being magnus 
you would think well it's two pawns black has   six pawns here same same material on the board 
more or less it blacks up two pawns looks really   really good but magnus being magnus finds the 
correct way to define the position with queen d3   so in this position with the bishop on d4 and 
the rook on b1 under attack i really only have   two ways to try and save material if i were to 
say move the rook to c1 or work to e1 for example   both moves would simply allow white to capture the 
bishop on d4 here so i can't really play for play   for either of these options so instead i play the 
move rook to b2 now rook a1 is also possible but   after rook a1 bishop a1 queen to d6 here i felt 
that the bishop on a1 is completely out of play   here and it's not really doing a whole lot it's on 
this diagonal but it's not doing anything else so   instead i play rook to b2 because now afterward 
takes b2 bishop takes b2 the bishop is attacking   the pawn on a3 still however here magnus plays 
queen to d6 and after i play the move pawn to g6   magnus plays move pawn to e4 very good move here 
even though black is down too even though sorry   even though white is down two pawns here you'll 
notice that black has problems because the pawn   on d7 is still very weak and additionally this 
pawn on a4 is now on a white square as well so   white has a very simple idea of going bishop b5 to 
capture the pawn on d7 here so i play queen to e8   magnus goes queen to d2 attacking the bishop on 
b2 additionally there is one difference if white   were to play bishop to b5 here potentially 
there might be some tricks with queen e1   king g2 and queen to e4 followed by some bishop 
d4 so by playing queen to d2 here first magnus   attacks the bishop on b2b also covers the e1 
square against a potential queen to e1 check   so here i play bishop a3 magnus plays bishop to b5 
now i go bishop to c5 magnus plays bishop takes d7   and now here i play queen to e4 now again this is 
an opening opening video so i'm not going to go   through the entire game i will note that black is 
up one one pawn here very centralized queen on e4   great bishop on c5 however with correct play due 
to the opposite colored bishops white should be   able to survive this and indeed magnus played more 
or less flawlessly to survive the game and make a   draw here so this is the first game that i want 
to go over so let's move on to the next game now   so the next game is a game that i played against 
peter savidler in our very recent matchup in the   speedchest championship which i would go on to win 
so again as as we start out as always b4 is played   peter plays e5 bishop b2 bishop takes b4 bishop 
takes e5 knight to f6 c3 is played by me with the   white pieces here and now peter plays bishop to 
a5 here now as i alluded to during the first game   this is objectively the most challenging approach 
primarily because black is a very simple idea here   black wants to go d5 c5 and d4 and take advantage 
of this pin from a5 to e1 so here i play g3 peter   plays c6 and now i play bishop g2 looks very 
similar to the first game with the exception being   the bishop is on a5 versus being on seven so peter 
castle's here now i play e3 same idea of playing   knight to e2 and castles again the way that i want 
to take the center is later on i want to play d4   and c4 if i get a perfect world scenario i'll just 
set it up for you guys so you see it bishop b6 d4   let's say d6 is played i take go 92 something 
like 97 castles just a6 if white gets this   position with c4 followed by knight c3 white 
is doing very very well here and it's very very   pleasant so after e3 rook t8 is played by peter i 
trade on f6 now i go knight to e2 peter plays d5   and now i castle now what you'll notice is that 
even though after 97 i get d4 and i'm not easily   getting in the c4 pawn push without getting 
the c4 pawn pushing it could get really bad   in a hurry because first of all the bishop on g2 
is staring at a closed diagonal there are a bunch   of pawns in the way additionally if black can 
get knight b6 and bishop f5 blackwell ideas like   knight c4 bishop e4 and it could be very dangerous 
very very quickly so peter plays knight b6 here   tries to put the knight on c4 or potentially play 
for bishop f5 and bishop e4 so now i play knight   to d2 peter goes bishop g4 and now i play the move 
rook to c1 very important move here if i were to   play a move like let's say h3 black can simply 
trade on e2 and win the pawn on c3 and if i were   to try something like pawn to f3 for example here 
this is very sketchy because after f3 black can go   bishop to c8 and there's a very they're very weak 
pawns here on e3 and c3 potentially computer of   course says that after knight p3 white's probably 
okay but it's very difficult to play for a human   so instead i play the move rook to c1 
very logical move to guard the pawn on c3   so peter trades on e2 now this move i think is 
just a mistake that occurred in a blitz game   i think in a much slower game peter never would 
have played a move like this computer in fact   thinks that after queen h6 here black is doing 
very well because you prevent h3 and it's really   a question of how white will ever break this pin 
and of course now f3 is not possible whatsoever   because queen takes e3 would be checked so after 
queen h6 is very hard for white to play however   again this was a blitz game and peter instead 
took on e2 which is a big mistake because as   i've alluded to before one of the biggest points 
behind playing this polish opening where you give   a pawn on the side for a pawn on the center is 
that white wants to show that the pawns in the   center and the center center pawn pushes are more 
important than pawns on the edge of the board very   specifically a7 and v7 so it's a big mistake by 
peter to trade so he trades he goes knight a4   and now i go c4 now i suspect during the game 
peter probably saw one of a cup saw a couple ideas   here first of all i think he probably thought 
maybe there was queen takes d4 because now if i   take the queen black can simply capture the queen 
on e2 and if i play a move like knight to b3 here   black can go queen to b6 guarding the bishop on 
a5 but now white very simply takes the pawn on d5   and after pawn takes bishop takes white has a 
great wooden shield in the center of the board   here with the bishop on d5 additionally the knight 
on a4 and the bishop on a5 are both on the rim   and it's really really hard to play for black so 
after c4 peter plays knight to c3 so now i play   queen to d3 computer plays knight takes a2 and now 
i go rook to a1 attacking both the knight on a2   and potentially the bishop on 85. now black here 
were to say trade the bishop for the knight on d2   after queen takes d2 the knight on a2 is simply 
stuck here and it's completely winning for white   so after knight b4 is played i play queen to b1 
here peter plays pawn to b6 and now i go knight   to b3 so here peter plays queen to d8 trying 
to save at least materially everything on the   board here now he could have maybe taken on c4 
but after knight a5 b takes a5 brook takes a5   even though black is temporarily up a pawn after 
a move like rook a b8 here i can play queen c1   and all these pawns upon those c6 and c4 and the 
pawn on a7 are very very weak here and long term   for those who play the catalan they should 
notice the structure it's going to be really   really difficult to defend so instead peter plays 
the move queen to d8 so of course i take on a5   he takes back now i take on d5 he takes back and 
black is temporarily up a pawn here but once again   black has three pawns that are very weak the pawns 
on a5 and a7 are very weak they're double pawns   pawn on d5 is also very very weak and it's gonna 
have to be protected for the rest of the game   so here i go queen to b3 develop the queen put 
more pressure on d5 additionally i have an idea   like queen e4 and queen takes a5 as well 
so g6 is played here now i go queen to a4   peter plays rook to e6 and now i play queen takes 
a5 and already at this point even though material   is equal white should be much better if not 
technically winning due to the very weak pawns   on d5 and a7 so peter plays rook b6 i go rook 
c1 trying to take the open file again perfect   perfect placement of the brooks and the queen 
there's a lot of pressure towards the pawn on a7   the pawn on d5 as well and now the rook on c1 can 
come to c5 later on so after rook fc1 peter plays   queen d7 a fatal blunder now again as i said it's 
already very difficult to play for black maybe   something like a6 gives him some hope but still 
after move like rook c5 very very tough position   for black to play here so instead he plays queen 
d7 so i take on b6 and after pawn takes queen i   play rook takes a8 king g7 and now i play rook 
to a3 and here peter resigned in view of the   fact that he still has the weak pawn on d5 white 
the white king is very very safe here all these   pawns and this bishop around it and additionally 
i have ideas like rook b3 to win the pawn on b6   so therefore peter resigned here and i think this 
is a very illustrative game about why black has   to be very clear on what the ideas are um in the 
middle game in terms of white trying to play for   the c4 pawn break alright so let's move on 
to the next game so next game that we have   the next the next game that we have is a game 
that i played against the player valerie greenup   entitled tuesday so same opening again 
as i said this is an opening video b4 e5   bishop b2 bishop takes b4 bishop e5 knight f6 so 
here i played e3 and now green up plays for d5   d5 right away so i play c3 bishop d6 now this is 
not quite the best move um in this position as   i said bishop a5 is always a little bit better 
but we've now seen three different setups we've   seen bishop a5 bishop e7 and now bishop d6 so 
now after bishop d6 i trade i go g3 same setup   again castles bishop g2 attacks the pawn on d5 c6 
is played play knight to e2 bishop g4 is played   now i go d4 again very similar knight d7 
knight to d2 and black plays queen e7 now here   as i said before one of the reasons you really 
need to be aware of what you're playing for in   these positions is because queen e7 is already 
sort of going the wrong direction black has the   idea of playing knight f6 potentially and trying 
to play in the center whereas the knight really   belongs on b6 trying to go towards c4 so i castle 
here knight f6 is played and now i play rookie one   now the computer says that i actually could have 
gotten away with pawn pawn to c4 here but in a   blitz game a little bit unsure i thought it was a 
little bit better to be pragmatic guard the knight   on e2 so that i can break the pin with a queen 
move on the next turn and additionally maybe i can   play for c4 later on and the third point is that 
later maybe i can even go f3 and e4 and try to   play in the center of the board so after rook to 
e1 granola plays b5 stopping this pawn push to c4   i go pawn to a4 a6 is played and now i play queen 
to c2 here and now green up kind of loses really   loses the threat of the game he plays the move 
bishop to h5 looks like a very logical move idea   to go bishop g6 prevent e4 and also put pressure 
towards the queen on c2 so it looks like a very   very logical very human move here so now i play 
the move knight to f4 which attacks the bishop   on h5 also at bishop g6 i will capture it and the 
last point is black takes on f4 here after i take   back with the pawn let's just say black was queen 
d6 to illustrate the point after h3 blacks bishop   is actually getting trapped here by g4 and f5 
so say black goes bishop g6 i play pawn to f5   queen guards the pawn and after bishop h5 
i can simply go g4 trapping the bishop on   h5 and black really has no way to save the 
bishop say you play a move like knight to d7   same problem i go g4 bishop g6 f5 trapping the 
bishop on g6 here no squares for that bishop   so after knight f4 bishop g6 is played by grena 
so now i take on g6 pawn takes knight and now   i change up and i play f3 again you'll notice in 
this position black has a really strong grip here   on the c4 square i can't really open up 
this diagonal from g2 to a8 via c4 because   of the over protection the black has from the 
pawns on the queen side so instead i now go to   plan b which is now i play f3 to try and open up 
the center this way with a pawn push to e4 and   you'll also notice that now with the rook on e1 
it makes perfect sense in terms of why i played   this move earlier again i'd like to say that i had 
this plan during the game but it just so happens   that i put the pieces on the right squares so 
after f3 c5 is played so now i go pawn to e4   green f trades on e4 i take back with pawn of 
course pawn takes pawn takes and now i reach a   classic position where i pawns on e4 and d4 versus 
the pawns on a6 and b5 so here bishop b4 is played   play pawn to e5 discovered attack on the rook and 
the knight at the same time grant plays rook ac8   here and now i play queen d3 important that i do 
not take the knight right off it looks like well   if i take rook takes queen pawn takes queen this 
should just be winning for white whites up a piece   here but if i take on f6 black it's a very nasty 
move queen takes e1 and after rook takes e1 rook   takes c2 black is simply winning here because he 
has an extra rook for a bishop or for a knight   and there's a pin so i'm going to lose either 
the knight on d2 or the rook on e1 here   so after rookie c8 i play the move queen to d3 
sabrina plays knight d7 i trade on b5 and now i   play rookie d1 and i don't feel it's necessary 
really to go through the rest of the game in   depth here but you will notice that at this point 
white is quite a bit better white has these nice   pawns in the center there's big weakness on b5 
and additionally black struggles to develop so   just to show a few more moves black takes on d2 i 
take back with the rook still attacking the pawn   plays queen b4 and after rook to b1 queen c4 
i play the very nice move bishop h3 i do not   grab the pawn right away i put pressure on the 
diagonal first and after queen takes rick takes   rook fd8 i play the move rook takes b5 and now 
white is simply up a pawn here the rook guards   upon e5 so there's no trick like this because rick 
takes and white has one extra pawn here black has   double pawns and i would go on to win this game 
but as i've said before this is an opening video   so i don't want to go through a 50 move plus game 
um to show show and game technique all right so   let's move on to the next game so next game that 
we're going to be looking at is the game that i   played against alexander moscalenko now this game 
i did something a little bit different now so far   in this polish opening after b4 e5 bishop b2 takes 
takes knight f6 e3 castles c3 bishop a5 we've only   been looking at set of the g3 and bishop g2 now 
i think this game with bishop a5 illustrates why   the c5 d5 idea is so important so i play this 
move bishop to d3 here again for a g3 you can   see the previous couple of games so bishop d3 d5 
was played by mozcalenco this by the way was also   in a title tuesday event so i go bishop c2 idea is 
pretty straightforward i just want to develop my   bishop this way maybe 92 maybe knight f3 followed 
by castles so knight pd7 is played by moscalenko   so now i go bishop to g3 here moscalenko plays 
rook to e8 and now i play knight e2 looks very   very pleasant i'm going to get castle play for 
d4 knight to c4 maybe even e4 later and most   importantly i keep the two bishops on the board 
unlike in the other variations where i was always   taking on f6 however moss lincoln to his credit 
plays us very well he plays c5 now here i play   bishop h4 now i'm not really sure why i played 
this move in retrospect i think that during the   game the reason i didn't castle here was because 
i was worried there might be something like 94   and i might lose the bishop on g3 so i played 
bishop h4 he plays knight to e5 and now i castle   and now he plays knight g6 very very good move 
attacking the bishop on h4 trying to break the pin   from the vishwan h4 towards the queen on d8 so i 
go bishop g3 and now he plays 94 great move again   taking space in the center now if i were to trade 
the bishop for the night here it's important to   note that black takes with a pawn and now i have 
this very ugly pawn structure with this backwards   pawn on d2 which can no longer go forward and 
black is technically close to winning because he   can go bishop e6 and bishop c4 and i lack a lot of 
development and i have this very weak pawn on d2   so instead i play f3 so moscolanco takes so i take 
back with the pawn not the knight here because now   black can actually play d4 and you'll notice that 
i have big problems here i'm struggling to develop   the knight on d1 and the rook on a1 are not well 
placed i can't really get them into the game   so it's really really bad for white so i take 
with the h pawn which which is also not very   good but at least here black doesn't have d4 
immediately so now moscolenko plays bishop b6   here preparing to play the pawn push to d4 now 
here i would love to go pawn to d4 to prevent   that pawn push but i would end up hanging the pawn 
on e3 here so instead i play knight to eight three   and moscow i go plays d4 crack plate now i go 
bishop a4 trying to dodge this fork with d3 say   i go knight c4 for example just d3 and now the 
bishop of the knight of fork so i go bishop a4   moscalenko plays rook to e7 here and now i play 
knight to c4 and now moscolanco trades on e3   creates the weak pawn on his e3 square and 
he goes bishop e6 attacking the knight on c4   so here if i were to say take the bishop on 
b6 after queen b6 it doesn't look that bad   for white but in reality it's really problematic 
i have two pawn islands here on e2 and c3 these   two pawns are very weak additionally the bishop 
on a4 is not well placed and i have to deal with   problems on the long diagonal from b6 towards 
g1 where black maybe can go c4 and the fourth   fourth and probably final problem is that black 
can play rook d8 here and maybe even try to take   take control of the d file so here i play queen 
takes c8 bishop takes d8 and now i go knight to d2   protecting the knight but after a6 king f2 b5 
attacking the bishop bishop c2 bishop to b6 black   is completely fine in fact i think black is better 
here he's the two bishops he can start to mobilize   his pawns on the queen side i don't really have 
a lot of play in the center of the board here   and so black should be clearly better now i would 
go on to win this game due to some mistakes from   my opponent later on but out of the opening this 
is one example of why why at least in recent times   i've much preferred playing with polish opening 
with this idea of g3 instead of trying to put   bishop on d3 or e2 here and so i hope this 
game serves as a good illustrative example   all right so the next game that we're 
going to be looking at is is a game um   is a game against this player arya stanbeck urazia 
this is also from title tuesday as well in case   the names look a little bit unfamiliar so b4 e5 
there should be two bishop takes b4 is played here   and now i take knight f6 so e3 castles c3 
bishop a5 and here again in this game this   this is one of the earlier games i played with the 
polish opening i played bishop to d3 angling for   the same setup with bishop c2 so d5 is played here 
now i go bishop c2 and now knight c6 is played   now in the previous game we saw a great example of 
why the c5 pawn push trying to play d4 and stopway   from getting this sort of triangle in the center 
was so important so in this game my opponent plays   knight c6 so now i go back he goes 97 play knight 
e2 and he goes c6 now i castle and he plays bishop   f5 position is relatively balanced here i wouldn't 
say that either side is better but you'll notice   that black is not being very aggressive with 
this pawn push towards c5 and trying to fight   for the center of the board so white will very 
easily be able to play something like d492   and develop quite straight in in a quite 
straightforward manner so bishop h4 is what   i played here and now urazia takes knight g6 is 
maybe better again blitz game hard to find the   absolute best moves he trades and goes knight 
g6 very natural idea to to try and remove the   pin towards the queen on d8 again very similar 
theme to the previous game against moscolenko   so now i trade but here i can go d4 and what 
you'll notice is that in this position white   has traded off the lights or i should say black 
has traded off the light square bishops so now   it's going to be very easy for white to develop 
you have knight v2 with c4 or pawn to e4 as well   so h5 is played by urazia and now i go knight to 
d2 bishop c7 the idea of course try to maybe line   up a battery try to attack on the king side 
maybe h4 h3 as well so i go pawn to c4 pawn   takes pawn is played and now i play queen takes 
pawn h4 is played by urazyab and now i play h3   and now he goes 97 i guess the idea again probably 
trying to bring the knight back towards the center   maybe towards f5 and d6 but black doesn't really 
have much play here other than this diagonal   where maybe he can create some checkmate patterns 
so now i play rook b1 he goes rook b8 again tries   to guard the pawn and now i go knight to c3 
goes rook d8 and i play knight to f3 very   logical move maybe not the best move but i always 
try to stop these threats with like queen d6 and   queen h2 checkmate here and now i can sort of 
focus on either playing e4 and e5 in the center   or playing rook c1 and trying to play on the queen 
side gear as well so knight f5 is played here   i go pawn to a4 urzaya plays bishop to a5 and now 
i go knight to e4 plays queen g6 and i play knight   to e5 so again this bishop move didn't really 
serve much of a purpose other than creating   maybe a slight threat towards one of the knights 
but you'll see that the knights are now jumping   in the center of the board and it's very very hard 
for black to play so he plays queen h5 only move   really to still protect the pawn and f7 here 
and now i go knight c5 great placement of the   knight now i put a lot of pressure towards 
the pawn on b7 if black say tries to push   the pawn to b6 here i can now play knight take 
c6 and everything is sort of hanging for black   so knight d6 is played logical move it actually 
guards both pawns here so i play queen a2 bishop   to c7 back and now i go queen c2 queen to h7 
we trade the queens i go knight f3 attack the   pawn on h4 black and not go g5 to guard the 
pawn on h4 because then i would take on g5   so bishop b6 rook c1 knight f5 guards upon h4 
and now i play the move knight to b3 very very   simple plan of playing a5 and a6 here so rookie 8 
is played stop the pawn push potentially actually   this could be a real threat here let's say black 
plays move like f6 i can now go a5 bishop c7 and   i can even maybe go e4 here to undermine 
the knight on f5 and win the pawn on h4   so he plays rookie 8 to stop the pawn 
push to e4 i go a5 bishop to c7 i play a6   undermining the pawn chain here uh b7 and c6 he 
takes on a6 i play rook takes c6 bishop b6 and   now i go rook a1 and again the game goes on here 
it went off for another 15 to 20 moves but white   white is clearly better black's gonna lose his 
pawn at a6 and be down by a pawn additionally   i have a very compact center and black has a 
weakness on h4 as well as these two weak pawns   on clean side so long term it should be winning 
for white and i would go on to win this game   all right so sticking with the theme now we're 
going to move a little bit away from all these   variations with b4 e5 bishop b2 uh bish takes 
before bishop takes e5 so now you probably wonder   well okay why doesn't black just play a normal 
setup what is the difference between the pawn   being on b3 versus b4 so after b4 e6 this is a 
game another game from title tuesday i played   against francesco sonas bishop b2 knight to f6 is 
played here so now i play a3 of course black can   not take the pawn on b4 because after bishop g7 he 
would lose the rook in the corner so knight f6 is   played so now i have to play a3 to guard the pawn 
d5 is played knight f3 bishop d6 all very logical   so far nothing too uh on nothing too surprising 
from either side so i go e3 castles and i place   pawn to c4 here sonus plays b6 i trade takes 
back the pawn on d5 go d4 bishop b7 knight c3   knight to e4 and now i have queen to b3 now 
this is the big difference since a lot of these   positions are very similar to one b3 the real big 
difference between b3 and b4 is specifically by   having the pawn on b4 i can now put the queen 
on b3 so for example let me just set this up um   actually not quite sure how to set up on this 
analysis where it seems a little bit off so   anyway the big difference though of course is that 
you have this b3 square and in this case c5 is not   playable because i will just take back the pawn 
and after pawn takes you lose the bishop on b7   so therefore it's multi multifunctional first 
of all it stops at c5 pushes it black tries to   play normal normal sort of queen's indian nimzo 
indian setups and also you can put the queen on b3   as well so you have a little bit more space to 
play with so queen b3 is happens in the game   rookie 8. now i go over to c1 again 
trying to prevent this pawn push   a6 i go bishop d3 knight g5 and i go knight two 
of course by the way to point out one other thing   i can never take the pawn on d5 because after 
knight takes d5 bishop takes d5 queen takes d5   black as bishop takes b for this discovered check 
winning the queen on d5 so i play bishop to d3   here knight to g5 is played by sonus i go knight 
to d2 it's now c6 is played because again i am   threatening to capture the pawn say black plays 
a random move like h6 after knight t5 bishop d5   queen d5 you'll notice that bishop takes pawn is 
no longer a check because the knight is in the way   of this diagonal so c6 is played here now i go 
queen to c2 h6 of course i am threatening to play   h4 remove the knight and then win the pawn on h7 
so h6 castles knight to d7 is played here i go f4   knight to e6 and this is where i make a mistake 
in the game in the game i play the move queen   to b3 but here after the straight four pawn to 
f5 knight to g5 e4 white should be a little bit   better here and it's pretty straightforward in 
terms of how to play also with the pawn being   on c6 you have this closed diagonal suspicion on 
b7 is not very well placed here so again this is   one illustration of of what the differences are 
between b3 b3 and b4 but also additionally how you   should play if your opponent choose to play a very 
straightforward setup and pretend that you've done   nothing unusual alright so next game that we will 
take a look at again sticking of the theme with   different setups here to to round it out is a game 
that i played against rtm timofev a very strong   russian grand master also entitled tuesday so b4 
knight f6 is played i go bishop to b2 he plays   g6 now i go c4 bishop g7 knight to f3 again a big 
difference is with the pawn being on b3 versus b4   is that black does not really have setups with c5 
here so castles e3 b6 is played bishop e2 bishop   b7 now here for whatever reason i did not actually 
play pawn to d4 i think this was my initial idea   um but for whatever reason i didn't do it but here 
with the pawn on b4 versus b3 now ideas like c5   are not as effective for black instead i cancelled 
allowing c5 correctly i played queen to b3 here   and now timothev did something unusually chose 
to take the pawn on b4 i i would i would have   normally thought that it moved like knight c6 
is a little bit more natural because now if i   take the pawn on c5 here black can just take back 
and now if i were to try to grab the bishop on b7   after rook to b8 here there's a lot of pressure 
on the b file here and black is completely fine so instead temo fav takes on b4 i play queen takes 
b4 knight to c6's play so now i go queen to a3   and teemo five plays pawn to d5 so here i take on 
d5 plays queen takes d5 and now i go knight c3 and   much like in the other games oddly enough even 
though we haven't traded a b pawn for the e pawn   we have basically traded a b-pawn in essence for 
a d-pawn so you have a similar structure with   blacks these pawns on the wing and white 
is getting the center with f2 e3 and d4   it's so queen a5 is played now i go queen to b3 
queen to b4 is played and now i play bishop to a3   so team of fave trades the queens plays 
rook d8 to attack the pawn but now i play d4   controlling the center here i have this pawn chain 
f2 e3 d4 plays e6 to sidestep the weakness on e7   and now i play rook c1 and again as i've 
highlighted this is an opening video so i don't   want to get too deep into the weeds of entire 
games for the most part but what i would say is   here even though the computer says about even it's 
a little bit easier for white to play here and i   would go on to win this game eventually proving 
that these pawns and center are a little bit more   important these pawns on the edge of the board all 
right and for the final game which we're going to   go over this is an illustration of why even if you 
think it's a very straightforward setup to play   with white you do have to be very very careful 
from the get-go so i played b4 in this game also   from title tuesday against mikhail demidob a 
very strong grandmaster i believe from belarus   if i'm not mistaken so i go b4 and he plays c6 he 
goes c6 here and i remember since i was streaming   this game so those of you want to go find that 
find the video this title tuesday from june 1st   of 2021 i thought okay i just played something 
normal we're going to develop and we'll get a   game unfortunately after i play the move knight 
to f3 here demidov plays at 85 and already it's   a very tricky position to play now oddly enough 
the computer says that you can play b5 and if   black grabs this extra pawn you can play e4 d4 a3 
and play a crazy wing gamut here or something like   e6 and d4 and there's a lot of piece play it's a 
very very rich position who knows exactly what is   going on but having not known that after a5 i i 
already was in a lot of trouble in this game so   here i took on a5 and now demi dawg plays knight 
f6 now it's worth noting that after c6 on move one   probably the correct way to play this i haven't 
looked super in depth uh with any engines on this   is to play something like c4 here and now if 
black tries to play a5 on the wing right away you   can play something like b5 pawn takes pawn pawn 
takes with the idea of bishop b2 knight f3 and e3   and very simple development and the game proceeds 
pretty pretty naturally i would say for both sides   so after c6 i play knight to f3 a5 is played 
here by demi dog so i take he goes knight f6   of course i cannot play a3 trying to keep the pawn 
chain alive because after pawn takes pawn takes i   would simply lose the rook on a1 here so instead i 
take he goes knight f6 he does not need to rush to   capture this pawn on a5 play c4 pawn to d5 play 
e3 try to play very similar setup to what i did   in a lot of the other games just play like bishop 
e2 bishop b2 castles and pretend nothing is wrong   but demi dog just credit plays this very well so 
i play queen he plays queen a5 i go knight c3 and   immediately he plays pawn to g6 so now i go push 
b2 bishop to g7 and already it's very tricky for   white to play in the game here i make a mistake 
i play this move rook to d1 but it's already   difficult because if i play castles for example 
black is knight to e4 and this diagonal is a very   very big problem here there's not much that i can 
really do and after and if i play move like bishop   b2 again there are tricks where black and take 
on c4 i take back and maybe he can castle castle   and play knight e4 and it feels very shaky again 
with this open diagonal towards the bishop on b2 so i play rook b1 in the game hoping that if 
black state plays bishop f5 trying to target the   rook i can just take the pawn on b7 but demidoff 
castles and i castle back and now after knight e4   already this position is very very bad for 
white to play if i trade the knights on e4   after takes takes knight on f3 is weak said play 
knight d4 black can simply go queen takes a2   and already the position is really falling apart 
i'm down upon if i do something like bishop b2   black can now go c5 and i have problems with 
the bishop and the knight and everything is   really really bad here so i don't really want to 
trade the knight so in the game i play bishop to   b2 and after knight takes c3 bishop takes c3 
we trade everything off and here he actually   makes a mistake dummy dove takes on c3 if he had 
taken the pawn on c4 here after bishop takes c4   queen takes c3 black is simply up a pawn and 
much better here and if i don't take the pawn   on c4 there aren't really many other moves that 
make sense say something like queen d4 black can   play b5 guards guards upon on c4 and again i'm 
down a pawn and i'm probably close to lost here   instead he takes on c3 and now after 
pawn takes pawn takes queen takes   knight c6 rook c1 i was able to completely 
equalize in the game and make a draw but the moral   of the story from this game is that no matter 
how original you try to be with your openings   you always have to be aware of tricks from the 
get-go now for those of you guys who are more   more experienced or people who are polish 
the polish polish opening aficionados you   can obviously maybe take a look at that line that 
i mentioned with knight f3 a5 b5 and reach your   own conclusions but overall the main point is that 
even when you try to surprise your opponent you'd   be very sharp and very aware from the get-go all 
right so i hope you enjoyed you you enjoyed these   these games in the polish opening as i'm still 
stuck here in poland um i will probably be back   i will be streaming i hope to do some more youtube 
specific content as well for you guys i appreciate   everybody for hitting that subscribe button uh 
when you have the option so thank you so much   and and hopefully you enjoy the video have 
a good one you guys see from america soon you|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||To Poland Wock has sailed to Poland To Poland Wock has sailed to Poland To Poland Wock has sailed to Poland  To Poland Lean has arrived Cash green as kiwi These ain't 1s Amiri skeletons I throw władki* on her ass, they come back like a frisbee
(władki* means money. Comes from the name of a Polish king Władysław II Jagiełło, he is on the hundred złoty bill) They want to know how I took the style and swag Im in Poland, fresh as f*ck Im clean, I pass the pack To Poland It's a purple pack
It's a purple yacht Big benz
Big ass We make bread
Otherwise cash I turn off my phone
Missing in action It's not a dream 
So don't wake me up I'm jumping into a moshpit I will show Poland how to do that shit We moving lowkey I feel like Zack & Cody The codeine came by ship It's a purple pack
It's a purple yacht|||Invasion of Poland September 1st through October 6th, 1939 World War II The German invasion of Poland began on September 1st, 1939 and besides Germany and Poland brought the United Kingdom and France into the war. German preparations for the invasion started months before the attack and included not only military preparations, but also aggressive propaganda and similar actions to justify German aggression against Poland. Operation Himmler, also known as the operation Canned Goods was a false flag operation conducted in order to make the appearance of Polish aggression towards Germany. The most famous action of the operation was the Gliwitz incident on August 31st 1939. The Germans staged an attack on a radio station in Gliwitz Making it look as it was attacked by Poles and broadcasted a false call to Poles in Germany to rise against Hitler. Along with other similar staged incidents the Germans used this event as an excuse to attack Poland. Contrary to the Germans who had already disposed their units along the border with Poland before the attack, the poles had delayed their mobilization of their troops as they were pressured by their British and French allies not to do it. They believed that mobilization would only provoke Hitler and give him a reason to violate peace on the European continent . For that reason, the Polish forces didn't gather all their troops in time by September 1st when the Germans attacked them. Fall Weiss or Case White was the German plan to invade Poland from three directions through the north from Prussia and Northeastern Germany. A main attack through the Western border of Poland from East Germany and through the South from the border of the puppet state of Slovakia. Two army groups north and south were ordered to encircle the Polish troops and to meet near Warsaw. For the invasion, the German forces engaged two thirds of their infantry: almost all Panzer units and more than 2,000 planes leaving the rest of its units on Germany's western border in case of a French attack Since the Germans anticipated that the British and French would enter the war once Poland was attacked, they planned to finish the invasion quickly before the French and British troops would have time to mobilize. The invasion began in the early hours of September 1st with the guns of a German battleship which was visiting the Polish port of Danzig opening fire. The Polish defense known as plan West anticipated the protection of the entire border with Germany and Slovakia since this region was the industrial heart of the country. This proved to be a big mistake since most of the units couldn't made the quick maneuvers of German Panzer troops, leaving them to become surrounded. The first days of the invasion saw intense German attacks for both land and air. The Luftwaffe gained air superiority immediately, even though the Polish pilots put up a brave resistance. Attacks made by German Panzer troops were so intense that Polish units were forced to retreat from their defensive positions after the first days of combat. France and the United Kingdom declared war on Germany on September 3rd, but without any true support. The German forces used their tactic of Blitzkrieg - a swift combined arms attack that overwhelmed the enemy and surrounded them. German technological and numerical superiority proved to be a decisive feature of the campaign that Poland just couldn't oppose However, the Polish army did try to counter-attack the German forces at the Battle of Zura near Warsaw. During the 10 days of the battle from September 9 to September 18, the Polish forces were destroyed by the attacks from the Luftwaffe and Panzer units. In the two weeks of the invasion, the whole of Western Poland was conquered. Where that they couldn't establish any kind of tactical advantage, Polish command decided to retreat its troops to the southeastern part of the country, where there was a hilly landscape suitable for organizing a proper resistance. The vicinity of the Romanian border also gave the opportunity to withdraw from the country. The Polish plan was to establish a solid defence in order to prolong the invasion for a French and British response on the west. However, the British and French support would never come. The French only engaged in a small limited skirmish in the Saar land with no effect. The Polish plans proved futile went on September 17th, the Soviet Union suddenly violated a non-aggression pact at hand with Poland and attacked it with a pretext to protect the Belarusian and Ukrainian population. The Soviet invasion of Poland was pre-arranged with Germany on August 23rd 1939 with the notorious Molotov Ribbentrop non-aggression pact. This pact not only anticipated friendly behavior between the two countries, but also a joint invasion of Poland and its division afterwards. When 800,000 Red Army soldiers entered Poland, the Polish forces knew that it couldn't oppose the enemies on two fronts. Even though the Poles continued to resist the German forces like in the Battle of Tomaszow Lubelski all efforts were futile. Polish units were being surrounded everywhere and such was the case with Polish cities the capital of Poland Warsaw surrendered on September 27th after 16 days of struggle. The last Polish unit surrendered on October 6th after the Battle of Kock. Facing more powerful and numerous enemies on two fronts and abandoned by its allies, Poland suffered defeat. After it had been defeated Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union divided its territory, thus ending the Second Republic of Poland. For the German forces the Polish campaign helped invaluable lessons for future operations that led to the conquest of Europe. Even though defeated on the battlefield what was left of the Polish military continued to fight with the British forces until the end of the war. Subscribe and click the notification bell for more history videos. Get your copy of simple history World War 2 today. Hey Simple History fans, if you are looking for a better way to support the channel and help us create more epic content consider becoming a sponsor on our channel. Sponsoring means that for just 5 bucks a month you get these amazing perks You can be the first to see new episodes with early access. You'll be able to watch new episodes before anyone else with this perk a custom icon that shows alongside your username in the comment section and in live chat When you sponsor us you also become an influencer with sponsor only comments. You can communicate directly with us and help us pick the topics that we'll do next on simple history Our videos will continue to be uploaded as usual and remember it's not mandatory to sponsor us Thank you for letting us feed your hunger for his|||Spending Christmas in Warsaw is a great way
to explore the capital of Poland and enjoy the festive mood and colorful holiday decorations. Although much of Warsaw was leveled during
WW2, the Polish People put their heart and soul to restore and preserve this beautiful
city. This video shows footage of some of the most
popular places worth checking out during the holidays. Enjoy. The largest square in the old town, Castle
square hosts the former official residence of Polish monarchs. During the holidays, it is a popular meeting
place to enjoy colorful illuminations and a Christmas tree. Located right next to Castle square, the Christmas
fair at the Barbican is a great place to shop for gifts and enjoy mulled wine and other
festive food. Adjacent to Castle square, Krakowskie Przedmieście
is a well-known street in Warsaw surrounded by many historic places. It also features some of the best holiday
decorations in the city. Łazienki Królewskie, or Royal Baths Park,
is the largest park in Warsaw and is part of the Royal route. It features many gardens and the palace on
the isle, which was one of the residences of the last Polish Monarch, Stanisław August Poniatowski. And of course, there is the famous market
square. In winter, the square is transformed into
a large gathering place for locals and tourists alike to enjoy holiday food and to try your
skating skills on the ice rink. There are many more places to see in Warsaw
that we did not cover in this video. I hope this video inspired you to travel and
explore more in the future. Please like this video and subscribe to see
more of our travel videos. See you next time!|||filthy [Music] to Poland [Music] [Music] hope you love me baby [Music] [Music] to Poland foreign [Music]|||the war against the Nazis and Hitler was among the most justified conflicts in history yet by the time the Allied victory had become inevitable it had become clear that there were additional political goals and for the USSR it was the domination in control of Eastern Europe both to serve as a potential buffer and to gain new allies we're planning to cover the Soviet ization of the Eastern Europe in detail but in this video we'll talk about Poland as its transformation had begun before the end of the war and would play a crucial role in our story going forward the second world war in Europe began in 1939 when Nazi Germany invaded Poland despite a gallant and somewhat unexpected resistance by Polish forces Poland's fate was sealed when 16 days after German forces crossed into Poland in the West Soviet forces invaded from the east fulfilling the secret terms of the molotov-ribbentrop pact that had been signed between the Soviet Union and Germany in late August the Polish government fled to London and established itself there as the legitimate and globally recognized government in exile the poles throughout the war continued their resistance to their occupiers both Nazi and Soviet and then only Nazi after 1941 when the German invasion of the Soviet Union occurred the resistance was carried out by various formal and irregular military organizations of which the Home Army or Army Akiva a.k was the most prominent the a.k was firmly loyal to the london-based government in exile the culmination of this resistance was the 1944 warsaw uprising launched in august as Soviet forces neared the city the uprising was brutally repressed by the Germans over the course of weeks and months as the Red Army held its positions allowing the Germans to effectively destroy the aka as a fighting force Stalin aiming to take complete control over Poland sponsored the establishment in 1944 of a new government in Poland the Polish committee of national liberation more commonly known as the Lublin Committee the Loveland committee set up as an alternative to the London polls was composed of Soviet trained communists and backed by the army allude over the People's Army anywhere from 15,000 to 60,000 men depending on whose estimates are used the People's Army was considerably smaller than the approximate 400,000 men of the a.k as the Soviet Union moved into polish territory through 1944 it immediately began installing members of the Lublin committee into power positions in the liberated territory despite the Soviet agreement that was made at the Yalta Conference calling for free and unfettered elections in Poland to allow the establishment of government of national unity the Soviet ization of Poland was happening simultaneously with the expulsion of the Germans the Lublin committee began to issue its manifesto which in combination with the severe weakening of the AKA after the warsaw uprising helped increase the popularity of the communists the most notable change was the land reform decree in september 1944 from which more than 1 million peasant poles got land at the same time numerous factories in the newly liberated territory were taken over by workers who created workers councils soviets to manage them the provisional government formally established in january 1945 was of course dominated by communists and was headed by eduardo so kamarowsky non leftists were shut out of the government and all security was being handled by the NKVD the Soviet secret police the government of Poland was made accountable to the unelected communist dominated state National Council the political landscape in Poland as the war was ending was dominated by the left and non leftist forces were banned and persecuted only one prominent non-communist political force was allowed to operate the peasants party headed by the former prime minister of the London poles stanislav Mikolajczyk sixteen representatives of the Polish underground state itself vehemently opposed Soviet occupation were abducted by the NKVD and brought to Moscow where show trials were held the group included the commander-in-chief of the Home Army Leopold o cool ski and the former Deputy Prime Minister yen stanislav yankovsky as well as several other ranking representatives of the london poles and the Polish underground state of the 16:13 was sentenced to various terms of arrest and some of those were allegedly murdered while serving their sentences the first electoral test of the communist government in Poland came in 1946 with a referendum asking three questions the first was if the people were in favor of abolishing the Senate the second was if they agreed to the nationalization of industry in the consolidation of socialist economies and the third question was if the poles were in favor of the changes to their western border the official results indicated that the poles voted in favor of all three proposals however there were also serious allegations of widespread voter fraud in kakaako where the opposition managed to ensure a fair vote the votes against the questions were 84 percent 59 percent and 30 percent for the three questions this significantly differed from the official results however the objections of the opposition were it simply ignored the referendum led to industry being nationalized the implementation of the state-led economy and a unicameral Sam Parliament the next stage in the consolidation of power by the Communists came during the 1947 parliamentary elections the Democratic bloc led by the Soviet trained Boleslav bare-root and his Workers Party faced off against the opposition People's Party led by Mikolajczyk the campaign was marked by violence and persecution against the opposition over 80,000 members of the People's Party were arrested mostly for false charges in the month leading up to the election of these people approximately 100 were murdered by this Polish secret police the uvp these actions as well as widespread vote falsification on the day of the election led to Beirut in the democratic bloc winning 394 of the 434 seats in Sam Michael I check only secured 28 the 1947 legislative elections ensured the total domination of Poland by the communists as Beirut was elected president while make a light Chuck and other opposition leaders fled the country as a result of further prosecution the People's Party soon dissolved with the left wing of the party merging with the ruling Democratic bloc the same fate awaited the Polish Socialist Party and several other smaller what emerged was the Polish United Workers Party which then went on to control Poland for the next four decades only two other parties were allowed to function but as they did not oppose the government their sole purpose was to create the illusion of a multi-party system at this time Vladislav Gomulka was the head of the Communist Party but was opposed to the stylist approach a rule where the party was controlled by Moscow with very little independence Homolka was one of the architects of the Communist consolidation in Poland and very much involved in the falsification of election results and persecution of political opponents he was very much a communist but wanted to be able to bake the specifics of Poland into consideration when creating policies as a result of what amounted to an anti Stalinist stance he was ousted from the Communist Party labeled a right-wing nationalist deviator and arrested barrowed took charge of the Communist Party repression such as these were common against people or groups who were determined to be against the government direction and could even extend to members and factions of the ruling party the Ministry of Public Security and BP and the Department of Security eub were the main tools of state repression there are estimates that at one point there was one ub agent for every 800 Polish citizens with the consolidation of communist power came the emergence of a new political and bureaucratic elite the nomenclature Oh replacing the old political and economic elite it was made up of the leaders of the Communist Party at both the central and regional levels the heads of factories industrial institutions and top-ranking security and military officials nomenclature aware people considered ideologically reliable and enjoyed many privileges in exchange for the influence which they exerted in society [Music] Poland heavily damaged in the warriors embarked on a path of rapid reconstruction and industrialization the three-year plan on reconstructing the economy was adopted in Poland to replace the 30% of production and infrastructure that was lost during the war the plan was dedicated to finding a balance between the private sector the public sector and cooperatives and did not emphasize an ideological approach the aim was to rebuild the country and raise the living conditions of the Polish people the plan was deemed a success in its ability as it helped rebuild industry but fell short in meeting agricultural output targets as a result of attempts at collectivization large pieces of land were being taken away from their previous owners and divided between farmers and peasants although the government aimed for soviet-style collective farms this created a great deal of resentment among the peasants and farmers and many simply continued to grow their own agricultural products by the end of the three year plan agricultural output remained below pre-war levels industrialization however doubled its production between 1947 and 1950 there were fundamental changes in demographics happening at the same time over one point eight million people moved into the cities finding work in the booming industrial sector as well as the reconstruction of the nation along with this in line with agreements made at the Potsdam Conference the ethnic German population that had been living in Poland was expelled west into Germany while the ethnic Polish populations in Ukraine and Belarus were relocated into Poland the success found in industrialization as a result of the merging Soviet market for polish products allowed Poland to increase its national outcome by the end of the 1940s this happened despite the nationalization of all industry private trade and enterprise it also happened in the face of the refusal of Poland to partake in the Marshall Plan the american-led plan for the rebuilding of Europe this refusal was the direct result of pressure on Poland from Moscow Poland by this time was rejecting the market economy and removing all remnants of democracy with the dissolution of opposition parties and the central planning office by 1950 Poland had transitioned to a centrally planned state economy with Beirut and his Stalinists at the helm a new six-year plan was launched at this time with an emphasis on heavy industry instead of the light consumer industry that had been the focus the first three year plan as a result despite the flourishing of heavy industry the services and food industries suffered and one would expect the living standards of poles began to fall the Soviet ization of Poland was a painful process for a country that had already suffered heavily during the war the liberation from Nazi occupation had resulted in Soviet occupation and Poland subsequently became a Soviet satellite state the ruling Communist elite depended on the Soviet Union for its political and economic choices political competition was not allowed and opponents were persecuted including the Catholic Church and the remaining intelligentsia that had survived the war the policies adopted in Poland which focused on rapid industrialization were beneficial towards the rebuilding of the nation but the focus on heavy industry agriculture elective ization and the refusal to participate in the Marshall Plan all ultimately harmed the poles significantly the Soviet dependent communist regime would remain in control of Poland for the next four decades the post-war period was a diplomatic mess and the Soviet ization of Poland proved that the world needed an international structure to deal with the current and potential future crises and we'll discuss this more in future videos so make sure you're subscribed to our channel and have pressed the bell button we rely on our patrons to create these videos so consider supporting us via wwp patreon calm the Cold War this is the cold war channel and we will catch you on the next one|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Poland is changing. Every year the country celebrates its national
Independence Day in the capital, Warsaw. There are parades and speeches
But in 2017, Poland’s Independence Day made worldwide news because of these signs: 60,000 people showed up for a march led by
Nationalist and white-supremacist groups. That’s because they have reason to celebrate,
too. Poland’s right-wing political party, PiS,
is in power. After winning the Presidency and a majority
in Parliament, they've ignored the constitution, Taken over the courts, purged the military,
and cracked down on the media. PiS is bringing authoritarianism back to Poland
and openly rebelling against the European Union. It’s a shocking turn for a country that,
just a few years ago was hailed as one of Europe’s most promising young democracies. So, how did this happen? And can it be stopped? It was an old story to the Polish population
- conquest, subjugation, enslavement. it had happened before in Poland’s troubled
history but never with such inhumanity Poland had a traumatic 20th century. It was invaded twice during World War Two. First by the Germans and then by the Soviets...
...who re-established the country after the war, but as a communist state under their
control. In fact, Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin directly
contributed to a draft of Poland's constitution, which was formalized in 1952. These are his handwritten notes. For the next several decades, Poland developed
very little while it was cut off from the rest of the world. It became one of several Soviet-backed, communist
countries in Central and Eastern Europe that made up the Soviet bloc. That started to change in the 1980s. Polish unions started organizing huge strikes
against the communist government. The movement came to be called Solidarity
and it grabbed the attention of the world. In 1989, the communist government caved to
the pressure and agreed to let non-communist parties run in the elections. Solidarity and democratic candidates went
on to win the majority of parliament and the presidency. They established the Republic of Poland and
became the first country in Europe to topple communism. The rest of the Soviet bloc soon followed. This posed a challenge for Western Europe. We cannot aim at anything less than the union
of Europe as a whole and we look with confidence for the day that union is achieved Since the end of World War Two, the continent’s
democracies had been growing closer; signing free trade deals that became the precursor
to today’s European Union. At first, the trade deals just covered coal
and steel, but as they grew to include agriculture, energy, and other markets, more countries
joined-- making Europe more economically and politically integrated than it had ever been
before. As the former Soviet bloc countries started
establishing democracies of their own; Western Europe needed to find a way to include them. So in 1993, the established EU countries came
up with a strict checklist for admitting new members. New member-states needed to have a free market
economy, respect human rights and the rule of law. Meaning courts had to be independent and impartial--
so everyone could get a fair trial. These EU rules helped bring former-communist
countries in while also keeping them from sliding back into authoritarianism. They were designed to keep the peace in Europe. Poland joined the EU in 2004 and because of
Solidarity's success it became one of the most promising new member. Poland was given more money than any other
EU country which it used to build highways, schools, hospitals, and modern infrastructure. The country’s economy grew more than any
other ex-communist country. Each year after it joined, Poland received
millions of Euros to help fund highways, schools, hospitals, and modern infrastructure. By 2014, Poland became one of the EU’s strongest
and most resilient members. It even avoided the recession in 2009 that
crippled economies worldwide. Polling showed 72% of Poles were satisfied
with EU membership. More than any other member state. Minister of Foreign Affairs Radosław Sikorski:
“Ladies & Gentleman, 10 years ago we joined the European Union. We did not become part of the EU on a whim. We became part of the union because we put
in tremendous efforts to build a democracy and a free market economy; two pillars of
a united Europe.” And Poland’s charismatic, pro-EU Prime minister,
Donald Tusk, was chosen to become president of the EU’s European Council. But in his absence, leaders with a very different
vision for Poland's future rose to power. In 2015 PiS, Poland’s right-wing party,
shocked the world and won an absolute majority in the parliament. Since 2001, PiS had been led by former-Solidarity
leaders Lech and Jaroslaw Kaczynski, who felt that Poland’s center-left parties had become
elitist and corrupt. It appealed to Poland’s conservative population
in rural areas. PiS only earned 38% of the vote in 2015, on
par with the previous election results, but after Tusk left for the EU, his coalition
of center-left parties fell apart, making room for the right-wing party to take over.h According to PiS, after decades of Soviet
control, Poland was now being controlled by the EU. So when it came into power, it pledged to
take back Poland’s independence … legally or illegally. The party already controlled BOTH HOUSE OF
Parliament and the Presidency, so it initiated a hostile takeover of the judicial branch. First it packed this Constitutional court
with loyal judges and then forced out more than a third of the judges in this other court. Both acts were illegal under the Polish constitution,
but the PiS-majority parliament and Presidency signed them into law anyway. The party also fired over 11,000 civil-service
workers and at least 280 military officers, calling them ex-communists. It cracked down on the media. It started leveling fines on news organizations
when it didn’t like their coverage. Meanwhile, it’s been using Polish nationalism
to justify these moves. Remember this 2017 controversial march? A PiS politician called it “a beautiful
site” While the party cracked down on protests against
their authoritarian moves. As PiS tightened its grip on Poland, the EU
issued several warnings to stop it from breaking its rules…. But PiS ignored them. “It is with a heavy heart that we have decided
to initiate Article 7.1”, “But the facts leave us with no choice.” In December 2017, the EU invoked Article 7--
its nuclear option-- for the first time in its history. It allows the EU to strip a member of its
voting rights if it feels it is breaking the criteria it established in 1993. // a significant number of laws have been
adopted… which put at serious risk the independence of the judiciary and separation of powers,
in Poland//. According to the EU, the PiS purging of the
courts violates the country’s commitment to respecting the rule of law. The problem for the EU is that Article 7 is
not going to work. The punishment requires a unanimous vote by
all EU countries -- and there is one country that has sworn to protect Poland... Hungary, another former Soviet bloc country,
has taken a turn towards authoritarianism under President Viktor Orban. And he vowed to veto any punishment against
Poland. So PiS continues to systematically strip…
on Poland while still receiving huge sums of money from the EU. It’s proving that a member country can stay
in the EU, reap its economic benefits, while ignoring its rules on rule of law. PiS is proving that it's possible to reap
the economic benefits of EU membership while flouting the rule of law. And that has sparked an existential crisis
for the EU... The rules that were written to prevent authoritarianism
from ever re-appearing in Europe, aren’t being followed, and there’s not much it
can do about it. The EU could try cutting off Poland’s funding
but it’s unclear how that would work. So for now, the EU remains in a crisis. For decades it’s tried to keep Europe democratic. But Poland, once the EU’s most promising
new addition, is Is now threatening to unravel the whole thing.|||this video is sponsored by skillshare what's up 
guys welcome back to the channel if you can't   tell from the title already this is unfortunately 
our last video of ours from poland um it's pretty   weird we've been traveling through poland 
now for coming up to almost three months   and we've been sort of just wandering around 
enjoying everything that we can we had made   a list before coming here of different places 
that we wanted to check off and we definitely   i think have achieved what we set out to 
accomplish now yeah definitely so we had   a certain list obviously before we came to 
poland but we added a lot more places to it   as we were going along and our travels in 
poland so in total we visited 16 places   which are krakow Wieliczka zakopane katowice
Częstochowa bielsko biała wrocław   Łęczyca toruń Olsztyn Gdańsk sopot Gdynia 
malbork and warsaw yeah so that's so many   that's pretty insane when you list it out like 
that we've really seen a large chunk of poland and   we've had some absolutely incredible experiences 
so far this video is sponsored by skillshare   skillshare is an online learning community with 
thousands of inspiring classes for anyone who   loves learning and wants to explore the creativity 
and learn new skills here at two mad explorers we   enjoy bringing you guys along on the journey 
with us so we were inspired to join skillshare   in order to create better videos for you guys 
and streamline the video creating process for us   so what we've been doing is using skillshare to 
discover how to better edit our videos using final   cut pro with the course video editing with final 
cut pro x from beginner to youtuber from ali abdal   this course has over a thousand reviews from 
like-minded learners and the course author ali is   ranked as a top teacher on skillshare's platform 
so we knew right away that this course was worth   looking into our personal favorite part of the 
course is how in-depth the course author goes   into each individual aspect of editing such as 
title and clips and color grading which is a super   important aspect for every one of our videos we 
are hoping that by the end of this course that we   will have a full understanding on how to better 
edit and create great videos for you guys here   on our channel so if you're interested in making 
a career pivot or simply want to improve in one   specific area of your creative field the good news 
is for you all that the first 1000 people to use   the first link in the description of this video 
we'll get a one month free trial of skillshare   so we want to say a major thank you to skillshare 
for sponsoring today's video and making this video   possible for you guys to enjoy now back to the 
video now that being said what were the highlights   for you of that list so i really thoroughly 
enjoyed this trip through poland and to be   honest there was definitely some things that 
stood out for me one of the things that really   stood out for me especially in the beginning 
of our poland trip was the Wieliczka salt mine   that was absolutely out of this world it was 
an experience that we i think will never forget   and it is obviously a huge attraction 
that pulls many many tourists into poland   and for me that really was the first thing in 
poland that we did where i was like oh my god this   place is amazing and it's such it's really really 
really worth seeing it's still on my list of where   we should get married so yeah well there you 
go so it's an incredibly beautiful place 100%   must visit the Wieliczka mines and another 
place for me that i really enjoyed was Wrocław   the city of Wrocław i loved all of the dwarfs i 
loved the creative atmosphere that Wrocław had   i think it was a really incredible city 
somewhere that is not often talked about   amongst many europeans as being like a 
weekend getaway or somewhere where you can go   and just relax have some hot drink a coffee 
you know and enjoy your weekend there i think   it's a perfect getaway destination and 
it's not added to lists enough i think   that it needs to be spoken about a little bit 
more i think it was a very underrated destination   in terms of cities another one for me that i 
would add as a highlight would be Olsztyn as well   Olsztyn you have the amazing lakes there  Olsztyn is kind of it's part of Warmia   and a lot of you guys said that it is the varmia 
region not the mazury region and the lakes there   and the general vibe there was just unbelievable 
so that would be my kind of top three for you   what's your highlights it's so difficult to decide 
to be honest i'm looking at this list and trying   to figure out which one my top three are but it's 
so so difficult in no specific order i would   probably put zakopane in the top three especially 
especially the morskie oko and the tatras like the   region there that was so stunning just to kind 
of hike in that area and it was just so surreal   like it's it's you can not like you cannot imagine 
what it's like if you go there you see a video and   you're like oh yeah okay i know what's going 
to come i know what the area looks like but no   video in this world could ever bring across how 
beautiful it is up there and i'm sure that one   day we will go back to the tatras to hike some 
more because i feel like we did some hiking but   not as extensively as we should have we missed 
out on a lot of different things there yeah and   another favorite of mine i would probably put 
łódź in the mix as well which is great but just   because of how surprising it was i heard or we 
heard so many negative things beforehand and   if you watch our channel for a longer time you 
know exactly if somebody says something negative   we are going there so łódź was definitely 
very very high up on that list for me as well   specifically the piotrkovska street it was just 
so beautiful it's such a stunning area obviously   łódź has bad sides łódź has good sides but 
i feel like łódź definitely should make more   people's lists in order to showcase exactly 
what the city has to offer because there's so   much culture there and it's just stunning and i 
really feel like everybody should take at least   the weekend out of their year to visit łódź and 
just drink a coffee on the Piotrkovska street and   my can i do a top four maybe yeah yeah okay so 
then would probably be toruń and malbork those two   cities were really really surprising for me i'm 
a history lover myself so you can imagine toruń and malbork both of them with especially malbork 
with the largest castle in europe i know a lot of   people were commenting it's not the largest but it 
is it is just circumference wise it is the largest   castle in the world and i believe just building 
wise it is the largest red brick castle in europe   so that area by itself is just so so stunning and 
definitely worth visiting i think i think it took   us around five and a half or six hours to just get 
through that castle because we are we were trying   to see everything it was crazy and at the end both 
of us were just kind of going on walking on all   fours like crawling basically but we did it we saw 
the entire castle and toruń specifically i feel   like just the entire city is so so stunning with 
the whole gingerbread history behind it we ate   our body weight in gingerbread i think in the week 
that we were in toruń and it's just just being   there makes you feel like you're walking through 
a fairy tale so toruń makes the list for me as   well awesome so that was both of our highlights of 
the polish trip that we had and to be honest what   going on this trip and being in poland for such a 
long extended period of time as tourists it really   makes you realize how undiscovered and underrated 
a lot of poland is and to be honest we're both   utterly blown away and amazed by the support that 
you guys have been showing us we get messages   still every single day on youtube and on our 
social media facebook and instagram etc from   you guys that are letting us know different things 
that we missed out on different recommendations   that you have and also letting us know how much 
you love what we have been doing in poland and we   are both genuinely blown away and super super 
happy every single day that we are going but going   into our youtube checking up to see how certain 
videos are doing and we're just amazed every time   about how well you guys are receiving the 
content that we are putting out and it's just   absolutely fantastic we've enjoyed every 
single second of exploring around we've met   plenty of different polish locals etc and we've 
tried some incredible food and polish beer as well   i want to say thank you for the support as well we 
appreciate each and every one of you and obviously   we see you in the comments and we do recognize 
you guys as well if you comment like several   times i keep saying to luke for example 
oh look Ewa Milena is back she commented again   i have been doing that i think for the last three 
months pretty much and i really want to say thank   you to each and every one of you and obviously 
to every single person that we met on the way as   well i want to say thank you for all of the happy 
memories and with this poland series i really   want to kind of encourage you guys to go to poland 
and kind of step away from the usual regular   tourist lists that every single person does you 
know the top 10 trip advisor or whatever you might   call it step away from those lists and go to the 
places where people tell you not to go because   nothing bad is going to happen as you saw in our 
videos three months in poland nothing bad happened   no and it was incredibly it's an incredibly safe 
country it's incredibly laid back everybody is   just living their life and it's a beautiful place 
yeah and each and every city really surprised us   with it its own aspect as well so like every place 
that you go is very very different culturally   food wise the people are different so it's not 
like you go to one city in poland and you've   seen it all that's not how this country works 
yep 100% guys and we are sure that at some stage   we will be back we missed out on a few places 
yeah i know for sure that i want to go to Poznań   Białystok Kazimierz Dolny
 Bydgoszcz  there's a bunch of other places that   we've missed out on and i'm sure we will be back 
with our travels we kind of cut poland in half   yeah we basically went from just south to north a 
little bit left and right is missing yeah but that   is pretty much it guys for now going forward 
you can expect to see different content and   i hope you guys are going to stay with us and 
we are going to be showing you guys turkey so we're gonna be in turkey for 
the next basically three months   so i hope you guys enjoy we're gonna be 
showing you the ins and outs and all abouts   around turkey so yeah i hope you guys enjoy 
this new series that we have coming your way   for now we're so excited we are the two mad 
explorers my name is naomi my name is luke   and this is your reminder to keep exploring i'll 
see you guys in the next video thanks for watching|||Is Poland in the EU? the on so what's changed and Poland join the
European Union honestly a lot the country's gross
domestic product me double and the GDP per capita jump from almost
fifty to sixty eight percent to the EU average in only a decade aboard the EU economy
grew by eleven percent the Polish economy improve on 49 them so
the four times the EU average between 2004 in 2013 poland bounce from 12th 28 position
among major exporters its total banning reaching 836 billion
euros does not know the country in the EU the commit the same claim polls become
richer and they got the white goods to should
bring the number councils with the dishwasher increasing
by over 500 percent those are the computer by 156 percent
the same become well with the country receiving about 90
billion euros from the union between 2003 in 2013 you better hope to see some lasting
improvement and to cause you can the been over two thousand kilometers
the roads and was 2500 railway tracks added to the public transport network
while 1200 R&D project to blame truly underway almost twenty do you believe subsidies
have been given to polish homers as well as 20,000 Polish entrepreneurs
the number polls studying foreign universities as double one
investment in Polish universities triple around those ten years a BU
membership unemployment fell from twenty percent in 2003 to less than fourteen point five percent
in 2013 them to the six-point fun person to
polls bank in the work force it is always a great thing that's
because by the mood today Poland which is home to put money as it
money what's the poem head|||In March 1604, an unknown young man 
came to the court of King Sigismund III   in Krakow. He met with the Polish King and 
introduced himself as Dmitry Ivanovich,   the son of the deceased Tsar 
of Russia Ivan the Terrible,   and the brother of the last Russian Tsar 
of the Rurik dynasty, Fyodor I Ivanovich.   This meant that he was the legitimate heir to the 
Russian throne, and the entire Tsardom, which was   going through a difficult period of crisis due 
to the extinction of the ruling Rurik dynasty. 
  In addition to rebellions and battles for 
the throne, Russia was hit by a huge famine   in which hundreds of thousands of people died. 
This period is known as the Time of Troubles.   Until then, it was believed Tsar Dmitry Ivanovich,   the youngest son of Ivan the Terrible, had died 
13 years earlier under mysterious circumstances.   So it was a minor miracle when he arrived in 
Krakow to ask Sigismund and the Polish nobles   for support in overthrowing the usurper 
of the Russian throne, Boris Godunov. 
  Privately, many Polish and Lithuanian magnates 
doubted Dmitry’s aristocratic origins.   But they conveniently stayed silent on 
the matter, for their ambition was to take   advantage of the vast Russian territories.
To garner support with the Polish king,   Dmitry converted to Catholicism and promised 
territorial concessions if he became Russian Tsar.   Sigismund saw this as an opportunity to expand his 
influence towards Russia, while the proponents of   Catholicism wanted to use this to spread their 
religion to the east. In addition, the idea for   the formation of the Polish-Lithuanian-Muscovite 
Commonwealth was again at the top of the agenda. 
  However, with his armies busy on other fronts, 
the Polish king could not officially support   this enterprise. BUT, he gave a handsome sum of 
money to this young man, who claimed to be Dmitry,   to hire mercenary troops, while some of 
the nobles of the Commonwealth provided the   majority of the army in support of this campaign.
Soon, news that Tsarevich Dmitry Ivanovich was   coming with an army reached Moscow. Alarmed, Tsar 
Boris Godunov went public and spread the story   that the man who pretended to be Dmitry Ivanovich 
was actually a runaway monk Yuri Otrepyev,   and that the real Dmitry died 13 years ago, 
in 1591. But despite Godunov’s declarations,   his popularity sharply declined, as he lost 
support of an ever-larger number of nobles. 
  By the fall of 1604, Dmitry had gathered 
around 1,600 soldiers from Poland,   2,000 Cossacks from Ukraine, and some mercenaries. 
And then, in October, he invaded Russia.
  Early on Dmitry had the advantage and conquered 
certain cities without encountering much   resistance. But soon he suffered a heavy 
defeat in the Battle of Dobrynichi. 
  As fortune would have it, he overcame 
this difficult situation exclusively   due to the sudden death of Tsar 
Boris Godunov in April 1605.
  Boris’ son Fyodor II Godunov ascended the throne. 
But both he and his mother were killed soon after.   In June, the man claiming to be 
Dmitry triumphantly entered Moscow   and was crowned Russian Tsar.
To strengthen his alliance with Poland,   he married a Polish noblewoman Marina Mniszech, 
who became the Russian Tsarina, in May 1606.
  But the situation quickly deteriorated from there 
for the new Tsar. Russian boyars were quick to   notice that Dmitry was surrounded by foreigners at 
his court, primarily Poles. The strong influence   of the Catholic Church at the palace was also 
a source of irritation. The last straw was that   the new Tsarina Marina did not convert to 
Orthodoxy, which was a tradition in Russia.   Fearing westernization of Russia, the boyars 
plotted an attack on the Kremlin. False Dmitry   was killed, cremated, and his ashes fired 
from a cannon in the direction of Poland.   Vasily IV Shuisky, a leading Russian boyar 
with distant origins from the Rurik dynasty   was proclaimed Tsar of Russia. Further unrest 
followed, with Moscow itself besieged. However,   the rebellion ultimately died down.
Stranger still, in the summer of 1607,   another Dmitry Ivanovich appeared, claiming he 
had survived the attack on the Kremlin and then   started a rebellion against Vasily IV. 
It was lost on no one that this man was   an impostor of an impostor. Yet, the new 
Dmitry garnered support from the magnates   who supported the previous Dmitry, who’s 
charred remains were fired from a cannon.   Even Marina Mniszech, the wife of the 
previous impostor, confirmed that this   new Dmitry WAS her husband.
In the ensuing turmoil,   Dmitry was able to gather a strong army and 
took control over a large territory in Russia.   The Crimean Tatars and the Nogai Horde used the 
upheaval to ravage unprotected Russian lands,   which created complete chaos.
Vasily, realizing that he was   in a very difficult position, in February 
1609 made an alliance with the Swedish King   Charles IX to defeat Dmitry, and in return 
handed over the Korela Fortress to Sweden. 
  In March, the Swedish army under the 
command of General Jacob De la Gardie   went to the aid of the Russians. In Novgorod, 
it united with a part of the Russian army,   and headed for Moscow, which was under siege.
  Seeing Sweden's interference in the 
Russian civil war, King Sigismund III   immediately prepared for the campaign, not 
allowing Sweden, of which he was once king,   to expand its influence. Since the Zebrzydowski 
rebellion in Poland ended at this time, Sigismund   rallied support of the nobles, the Catholic 
Church and the Pope, and raised a strong army. 
  The Polish-Lithuanian host of about 
22,000 soldiers, under the command of   King Sigismund III himself, invaded Russia 
in September and besieged Smolensk. 
  The imposing fortress of Smolensk was of 
great strategic importance at this time.   The one who controlled it could easily break 
through towards Moscow. However, the city   was well fortified, and the siege dragged on.
On the other hand, Sigismund's campaign negatively   affected Dmitry’s position, because most of the 
Polish troops serving under him now deserted   and joined the army of the Polish King. In 
addition, Sigismund's ambitions grew, and he no   longer wanted to appoint Dmitry as Tsar of Russia 
but wanted the whole of Russia for himself.
  Allied Russian-Swedish forces under the command 
of Shuisky inflicted several defeats on Dmitry and   then gathered a large army and set out to deal 
with the greatest Russian threat - the Poles.
  Learning of the movement of the Russian army, 
Hetman Stanisław Żółkiewski led a small part   of the army, primarily cavalry, to intercept the enemy,
while most of the Poles remained near Smolensk. At the end of June 1610, Żółkiewski defeated 
a Russian vanguard of about 5,000 men   near Tsaryovo-Zaymishche, and then 
surrounded and besieged their camp.   Realizing that the rest of the Russian army 
was nearby, he left some of his men to watch   on the besieged enemy soldiers, and with 
the rest he went to the Russian main army.
  After a long night march, Polish soldiers appeared 
in front of the encamped Russian army before dawn   on July 4, 1610. As Russian Commander Dmitry 
Shuisky was not even aware that the enemy was   in their vicinity, Stanisław Żółkiewski 
wanted to carry out a surprise attack,   but as he waited for all the soldiers 
from the long marching column to arrive,   such an attack was impossible to carry out.
Dmitry Shuisky's army was deployed in two camps.   In one camp were the Swedish mercenaries 
gathered from all over Europe and numbered   about 3,300 soldiers. In the second camp were 
Russian forces numbering about 20,000 troops.   In addition to this, they also had 11 cannons.
On the other hand, Żółkiewski had only 2,500   cavalry under his command, mostly winged hussars, 
then 400 Cossack and 200 Polish infantry,   and 2 cannons. The infantry and cannons were late, 
and they were still far from the battlefield.
  Before the battle itself, Stanisław Żółkiewski 
ordered the surrounding villages to be burned,   so that enemy infantry could not use them for 
defensive purposes. The fence and obstacles   that served to slow down the onslaught of 
cavalry were also partially destroyed.
  Russian forces were soon also deployed, but 
because they were located between the Vdovka   and Gzhat rivers, they could not be spread to 
take advantage of their numerical superiority.   Their troops took up positions behind the damaged 
fence. Behind the left wing of their army, was a   strong group of Russian soldiers, mostly composed 
of mobilized men, and they served as a reserve,   because it was not possible to 
deploy them on such a terrain.
  It is noticeable that Żółkiewski concentrated 
his main forces on his right wing.
  At about 4 o'clock in the morning polish 
trumpets and drums gave the signal to the hussars   and marked the beginning of the battle.
Alexander Zborovski's heavy cavalry attacked   the center. At first they advanced 
slowly, but when they approached,   a fierce charge was launched towards the enemy 
in order to collide at the highest speed. 
  The first contact was disastrous for the front 
lines of the Russian army. Although the Polish   hussars could only pass through the gaps in the 
fence that they had partially destroyed before   the battle, they inflicted heavy losses 
on the enemy. Russian battle formations   gradually started to disintegrate, and 
were forced into a slow withdrawal.
  The hussars, having lost momentum, quickly 
reorganized their formations, and launched   a new attack on the second Russian line.
In response to this, the Russian cavalry   from the second row set out to meet them. A new 
bloody showdown ensued. However, the Polish riders   lost most of their long lances in the previous 
charge, limiting the shock of their charge.
  A fight with swords and sabers occurred. 
Yet the Poles continued to advance into   the depths of the Russian army formation. 
And again, as they lost momentum and became   threatened from the flanks and rear, they 
withdrew in formation to the starting positions.
  During that time, the Polish left wing, under the 
command of Mikołaj Struś, had difficulties with   the Swedish mercenaries. Since the fence on this 
part of the front was only slightly destroyed,   the cavalry charges were less effective. Although 
the Swedish mercenaries were unmotivated to fight   because they did not receive their salary 
on time, their discipline, training and   equipment successfully matched the Poles.
The Poles found themselves in a very difficult   position here. Enemy musketeers, protected by 
the fence fired at cavalry from close range,   while pikemen did not allow the 
Poles to break through the lines.
  Meanwhile, a new charge on 
the Polish right wing occurred   with fresh Polish units. The hussars again 
dealt a heavy blow to the enemy's front line.   They began to break through the mass of Russian 
soldiers, and gradually advanced north. However,   when they broke through, the Poles were 
again left without most of their lances,   and the second Russian line stopped them again. 
Threatened from the flanks, these units started to   retreat, while a third wave of fresh 
Polish hussars started to advance.
  The less numerous Polish left wing could not 
make similar breakthroughs. Swedish mercenary   pikemen and musketeers proved a solid defensive 
combination, and musket fire also had an important   psychological effect on humans and horses.
After a long fight, the first line of   cavalry started retreating here as well. 
When the first line successfully left the battle,   troops from the Polish second line of the 
left wing rushed forward. Here, the Poles   carried out attacks by expanding their ranks, in 
order to be a harder target for the musketeers.
  The charge was no more 
effective than the previous one.   Although the Poles tried to widen the gaps in the 
fences, which was a dangerous obstacle for them,   they were not successful. Enemy 
musketeers, although inaccurate,   opened fire on the hussars again and again. 
After a Polish horseman was left without his   lance, he was forced to fight with a saber, which 
made the battle easier for the Swedish pikemen.
  The situation on this part of the front improved 
when after the Polish infantry and two cannons   finally arrived on the battlefield. They opened 
fire from a distance, in support of the hussars.
  Meanwhile, the right wing was almost completely 
left without fresh units. It seemed that,   despite strong charges and deep breakthroughs, 
they could not break the enemy formations.
  Because of this, Stanisław Żółkiewski 
gradually sent reinforcements from the   army reserve to his right wing. But despite this, 
most hussars were still left without their lances,   and were by now tired and demoralized.
Nevertheless, the hussars continued to carry out   their orders, and launched a new attack on their 
opponent. As the front lines of the Russian left   wing were by now weakened by the intense fighting, 
the Russian cavalry set out to meet the hussars   in order to slow down the Polish attack 
and give their comrades time to regroup.
  Soon the two armies clashed and a real cavalry 
battle ensued. The very beginning of the fight   was uncertain, but soon the skill and 
discipline of the hussars prevailed   and gave results. The Russians set out on a 
total retreat north, followed by Polish cavalry.
  However, the Russian cavalry managed to fulfill 
its task and slow down the opponent, and the   Poles, realizing that they had lost momentum 
again, retreated to their starting positions.
  Shortly after this retreat, the Russian ranks 
spread and opened the way for a new cavalry   detachments that set out to attack. These were the 
Reiter detachments, cavalry that carried firearms   in addition to their swords.
The Polish troops, which had been   resting and preparing for the next attack so far, 
reacted quickly and set out to meet the enemy.
  When the Poles came within range, the 
Reiter detachments abruptly turned   and opened fire. They then wheeled about 
and galloped back towards their own army.
  The Poles remained steadfast and continued 
to advance, but the second line of Reiter   detachments appeared in front of them 
and also performed the same maneuver.
  This time, the hussars proved their mettle by   accelerating into the hail of bullets, 
catching up with their opponent.   A new cavalry battle occurred. The clashing of 
steel and the screams of men pierced the air,   as the highly trained Reiters and Hussars stood 
toe to toe. The Polish advance slogged forward,   but it seemed that this was another attack 
that would end with only limited success
  But the stubborn Poles refused to 
back down and at one point the Reiter   detachments reached their breaking point 
and started fleeing towards their comrades.   Seeing the mass of their own cavalry and 
Polish horsemen rushing towards them,   the whole Russian left wing collapsed 
in panic. The first ranks began fleeing,   and their escape provoked a chain reaction in 
which the entire Russian left wing set out in an   unorganized retreat towards their camp. 
Fleeing the Polish cavalry, many were cut down,   while continued their retreat 
much further than the camp.
  During that time, the Russian right wing was 
still stable, but was soon exposed to new attacks.   An important role was also played by Polish 
infantry, who first shot at the enemy, then   drew their swords and also launched a charge.
Probably the greatest impact on the breakdown   of the Russian right wing was the attack on 
their left flank, which was now fully exposed.   After a long battle, it was clear that 
the Swedish mercenaries could not win   and they started to retreat. 
Unlike the left wing, the Russian   right wing withdrew in an organized manner, and 
here some of the Reiter units played a major role   covering the retreat of the infantry.
After more than three hours of heavy fighting,   the Battle of Klushino ended. Although Stanisław 
Żółkiewski managed to defeat his more numerous   opponent, two enemy camps full of soldiers 
posed a major threat. However, Żółkiewski   offered the mercenaries to side with him, and 
a good deal of them did, probably disappointed   because they did not receive their payment 
on time from the Russians. Those who refused   to accept this offer were permitted to leave 
the camp peacefully and head back to Sweden.
  Dmitry Shuisky then initiated the withdrawal 
of the remainder of the Russian army. The   Poles took advantage of this and rushed towards 
his camp, to plunder it as soon as possible.
  After the battle the Russian soldiers, surrounded 
near Tsaryovo-Zaymishche, heard about defeat of   their army and decided to surrender, with 
some of them joining the Polish army. 
  Reinforced by additional troops, Żółkiewski 
continued with his army to the east   and soon entered the Russian capital of Moscow 
on October 8, 1610. He captured the Russian Tsar   Vasily Shuisky, as well as the defeated 
commander Dmitry Shuisky. This marked   the beginning of the Polish occupation of the 
Russian capital, which lasted for two years.|||Among the general population, there is the will to restore our ecosystems. Protection is not enough, we need restoration. Rivers in Europe are in bad shape. Sometimes we, human beings, destroyed them so badly, that leaving nature alone is not good enough. That it needs restoration. A river that flows through low-lands,
usually has an huge dynamic. It creates curves,
it changes its course. For hundreds of years, 
we have tied our rivers to dykes.  Now the rivers can 
no longer expand naturally. Here we constructed a series of nature-like 
gravel and stone structures that act like rapids. They do not stop the water, like a weir would, 
but simply slow down the flow. So the water rises above the level of these
structures, and only then flows downward freely. This adds oxygen to the water 
and also cools it down. because the water scatters against the stones, 
which are part of this construction, this sequence. Through these local changes,
the water is oxygenated and purified. The higher level of these structures also means
that more water stays upstream, rather than flowing off quickly. Suddenly we've got whirlpools and rapids,
which bring oxygen into the water. Plants start to root themselves in the
calmer sections of water. There's faster access 
for migrating fish species to build nesting grounds in the 
re-created rock and gravel structures. So we create biodiversity in small steps,
and when rewilding works well, this sets in motion a process 
by which the river restores itself. We have a situation where we have
more and more problems with drought, and after every rain we have flooding. This is the result of 
mistakes made in the past. The resilience of our environment 
to the effects of climate change is going down. This is very much
the wrong way. When an ecosystem is restored,
when it regains it's original function, when it looks as beautiful as it does here,
it's also such an opportunity for the region. If you have a regenerated river,
of course it's good for the river, of course it's good for the
animals living by the river, It helps us have cleaner
water, less floods. But it's also very good for the people living
around it because they can make a living. They can have tourism, 
nice restaurants, lodges, Biking, canoeing, ... It really can generate 
a source of income for regions that are usually quite
deprived of traditional industry. Without nature,
there's no food. Without nature,
there's no farming. Without nature,
there's no future.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Visting Krakow and looking for inspiration
for places to visit? Here are three things you shouldn't miss! Some consider Krakow Poland's unofficial capital! And much of it has UNESCO 
World Heritage status! Plus: almost a quarter of its 800,000 inhabitants
are students, making Krakow a very colorful and vibrant place. There are over 200 cafes in the city. 40 museums. And 125 art galleries. Krakow's huge market square, dating back to
the 13th century, is an absolute must-see for any visitor! Spanning 40.000 square meters, it's one the
largest medieval town squares in Europe. Take a stroll and soak up the fantastic atmosphere! And definitely stop by the Renaissance-era
cloth hall dating back to the 16th century. You'll find plenty of great souvenirs on the
ground floor. It's upper floor houses Poland's National
Museum, which showcases masterworks of  Polish art from the 19th century. From April to October, you can also visit
the tower of St. Mary's Church to watch Krakow's famous trumpeter play the so-called "Hejnal"
every hour on the hour. The bugle call has a historic origin dating
back centuries. Wondering what Krawkow specialty to sample? Definitely go for filled dumplings, 
known as pierogi. You can find them almost everywhere. We recommend going to Krawkow's trendy "Kazimierz" district, where you'll find  plenty of authentic Polish cuisine. It takes about 15 minutes to walk there from
the city center. "Starka" restaurant serves excellent pierogi  – 
Rysia and Halina have been making them for over 10 years! To make the dumplings, dough is rolled out
and then carefully wrapped around various different fillings. One serving costs 6 to 7 euro. Pierogi are Poland's national dish. Sightseeing done, belly filled …now what? Go see Oskar Schindler's enamel factory 
another must-see! The museum is always busy, 
so book your tickets in advance. Entrepreneur Oskar Schindler saved about 1,200
Jews from the Nazi death camps by employing them here, at his factory. The story is told in Steven Spielberg's film
Schindlers List. The exhibition paints a detailed picture of
Krakow during the Nazi occupation, and shows that although Oskar Schindler saved many lives,
he remains an ambivalent figure. First of all he was a member of the Nazi party. Then, when he came to Krakow he was running
a business taking Jewish property to get his personal advantages. But still he could abandoned these people
and he did all his best to save their lives. Finally, for a panoramic view over Krakow,
head to "Krakus" hill, about three kilometers south of the city center. For more videos like this, subscribe to our
YouTube channel.|||I have explored many many countries in their 
Cuisine but I've never been to Poland but   there were lots of people suggested me trying 
Polish food so I decided to fly to Warsaw and   I'm excited to take you on my food Adventure 
through some of the Polish best traditional   restaurants will sample delicious dishes 
like pierogi zurek soup Bigos pork Knuckles   cheesecakes and many many more I'll take you 
through different atmospheres from casual   and homely to Artistic and creative and I 
guarantee you'll love every bit of it hope   you got some snacks with you because this is 
the very moment we start our journey [Music] [Music] let's go wins up here to right in the old city center 
Warsaw it's up yet it is a chain of restaurants   that specializes in traditional polish pierogi 
this is basically their homemade dumplings uh   fried in a pan or boiled in water you can 
choose from a variety of fillings dumplings   with the cheese and potato and take some gravy 
on top horseradish with an egg with a boiled egg   wow it is strong so it's time for sure this is not your average suit it's a Sourdough 
soup made with love laughter and probably a few   too many meat I like that really you like jewelry 
no yes no I want to try it you want to try yes something interesting and by the way guys 
Zurich I ate a lot of times here in Warsaw   because this soup is just like blowing 
my mind every now and then when I tried   so it's time for pork guys when it comes to 
meat this dish is the king of the castle and   it's got more flavor than a foodie's Instagram 
feed pork knuckle it is big it is bold this is   almost exactly the pork meat which I showed 
you in Munich Germany in Poland people uh   like it too and the meat is sticking to your 
teeth every now and then be aware of this fact   beagles nicely fried prepared cabbage so I see 
the mushrooms the cabbage and the meat let's try it on a low heat for many many 
hours come here to Piazza and   try Biggers try dumplings and try 
zurek the traditional polish soup and now we are going to one of the most 
interesting places here in Warsaw with   the lowest prices that you have ever seen guys 
this place is called blechnibar or in English   it's a Milk Bar so this is the network of the 
restaurants with a very low priced dishes these   potato pancakes are like work of art they are 
crispy Savory and they'll make you wonder why   you have a bothered with regular pancakes in the 
first place Your Love yeah let's try some plastic   I like it but since in Ukraine we 
have the same almost the same dish I can do them like much better than it is here 
tomato and chicken soup was also great and crabs   with bearish Jam my mom and dad like it very much 
basically it's like a food from your school Buffet our next place has even more complicated name 
jivioli which means elements in Polish it is a   restaurant that celebrates the different elements 
of nature fire water Earth and air but actually   we went in just to try the traditional polish 
dessert sarnik which is a cheesecake let's go   for a coffee very sweet one and creamy my mom 
and my girlfriend Valeria liked it very much   experience [Music] sweet and cheesy cheesy 
alike but it's full of a little [Music]   it's good mama say hello [Music]   and I also bought zapiakanka polish take on 
Pizza a big zombie Conker it's like a cool kid   in a school it's hip it's happening and everyone 
wants a slice it's bread with some cheese tomatoes   and mushrooms but you can add different toppings 
support straight food basically it's like a   sandwich with some toppings like mushroom cheese 
tomato and stuff [Music] our next place named   polka it's a classic restaurant hidden in the old 
town of Warsaw the menu features pork schnitzel   with stewed mushrooms duck with beetroot salad and 
many more intriguing dishes it was okay guys but   it's definitely not the best restaurant that I've 
been to so let's get straight to our next spot our next restaurant stoliza which means capital 
in Polish is a restaurant that lives up to its   name it has also some International dishes like 
pasta which my mom actually liked a lot some   risotto with mushrooms some creative dishes like 
grilled dog filet with pumpkin puree and of course   some Polish Zurich is also available here the 
restaurant's elegant decor and attentive service   make it a great spot for a special occasion but 
the prices are still reasonable enough to make it   accessible to everyone we enjoyed our meal and 
rushed to our next spot Christina which means   guest house in Polish it is a restaurant 
that embodies the warm Hospitality that   Poland is known for the menu features dishes 
like kielbasa sausage with stewed cabbage   pork chops with boiled potato and even crabs 
with broccoli and cheese how do you like it   so basically it's like in German we ate 
sausages it is called kalbasa in Ukrainian it is fun this is what Germans called sauerkraut it is cabbage fried cabbage with some carrots some onions   give them spices I like discount the decor is 
rustic and cozy with lots of wood and polish   folk art the staff are friendly and welcoming 
and you'll feel like a cherished guest in their   home kielbasa sausage if you're looking for a 
sausage with some serious Street crab look no   further than kielbasa it's got the flavor the 
texture and the attitude to back it up when   you're done with the Jordan you can just break 
the blade and hit it because it's made of bread let's get straight to our next spot which is 
studied on which is old house and polish this   restaurant feels like a step back in time the 
decor is traditional polish with lots of in   cash accents the menu features International 
dishes like pasta barbecue ribs and tartar but also some classic ones like zurek beetroot 
soup and pork chops the portions are generous   the prices are pretty reasonable and the 
friendly staff make you feel like you're   dining in your grandmother's house well 
well bro I really hope I've inspired you   to come to Warsaw Poland and try their food 
I have plenty of other exciting destinations   and Cuisines to explore and I'd love to take 
you alone for the ride I've been waiting for   this moment so long we've come to one of the 
biggest shopping mall in Central Europe and   ordered the traditional soup of Poland this 
is called [Music] I like it let me know in   comment section what is your favorite Cuisine 
and if you have never been to Poland what are   you waiting for book your ticket and get ready 
to experience the best of Polish Cuisine thanks   for watching dude and I can't wait to take you 
on the next adventure of mine see ya [Music] try and create in another 
city yeah we about to take   off the digital Nomad and you know 
where he bout this is the Beatles Channel let's go|||Poland’s infantry are a peculiar case of 
extremes. As a former satellite state of   the Soviet Union, its roots 
are in Warsaw Pact equipment,   and they weren’t operating the best the Eastern 
Bloc had to offer by its collapse in 1989. But on the other hand, Poland has been a member   of NATO since 1999. Upgraded Leopard 
2PLs ride alongside ancient BMP-1s;   and new heavy equipment built on western 
design principles is around the corner. Today I’m breaking down Poland’s mechanized and 
motorized infantry units from squad to division,   covering current and new equipment, and 
their plans for an ambitious expansion. First, there are two main types of armored 
infantry squad: mechanized and motorized. The Mechanized Squad is currently mounted 
on the BWP-1 infantry fighting vehicle,   the Polish designation for the Soviet BMP-1 
first introduced in the 1960s. Its main armament   is a 73mm Grom low-pressure smoothbore gun, 
which fires the same munitions as the SPG-9   recoilless gun. It also has a coaxial PKT 
machine gun and Malyutka anti-tank missiles.   The BMP-1 can hold a max of 3 crew members, and 
8 in the passenger compartment. Although this   doesn’t directly translate to 3 plus 8 squads to 
accommodate Platoon HQ personnel. The BMP-1 also   only has a 1-man turret, so the vehicle commander 
- sat behind the driver - usually dismounts. This platform’s obsolescence is fairly 
obvious. Much like East Germany,   Poland only received a few BMP-2s before the 
fall of communism, which were sold off after   about a decade. Since then, Poland has failed 
to field a modernized version of the BMP-1,   which it attempted to do with the Puma program 
in the 2000s. The BMP-1’s hopeful successor is   the Borsuk or Badger, which is anticipated 
to finish qualification trials some time in   mid-2023 and be issued to the 16th Mechanized 
Division alongside K2 main battle tanks. As for the squad itself, they usually have 
eight personnel. They’re split into a dismounted   infantry element, called a Fire Team, and a 
vehicle crew. The Squad Leader is also the   leader of the Fire Team, and on the dismount they 
pass command of the vehicle to the Crew Leader,   who also acts as a Gunner-Operator on the 
BMP. Doctrinally, both are meant to be NCOs. The crew further consists of 
a Driver, and the most common   weapon for BMP crews is the mini-Beryl — a 
sub-carbine variant of Poland’s modernized   AK chambered in 5.56 NATO. The Squad 
Leader has the larger rifle variant. The dismounted element also has 
a machine gunner armed with a   UKM-2000P — essentially a PKM converted 
to fire 7.62 NATO — an assistant machine   gunner, an RPG-7 gunner and their 
assistant gunner, and a rifleman. It’s possible that the Rifleman is doctrinally 
meant to carry a GPBO-40 underbarrel grenade   launcher. But based on my conversations with 
Polish servicemembers and after combing through   photos of Polish exercises, it seems 
to be inconsistent or unit dependent. The Poles also haven’t adopted a grenade launcher 
for the MSBS Grot yet. So units like the 7th   Coastal Defense Brigade that have started the 
transition are empty handed in that regard. In addition to these previous gen weapons, 
the Polish are gradually transitioning to   new or upgraded weapons. The most famous is 
the MSBS Grot, which is replacing the Beryl,   although it currently doesn’t have a sub-carbine 
variant or adopted grenade launcher. Additionally,   the UKM-2000P is getting modifications 
that include a new stock and a picatinny   rail for mounting optics. The most common 
of which is the Eotech holographic sight. Further, there is talk that the RPG-7 
will eventually be replaced by the M72   EC Mk.1. Although since the M72 is a single 
munition, and the RPG-7 is a reusable system,   it is questionable whether they’ll be able 
to fully phase out the RPG-7 anytime soon   or if the weapons allocation will be changed up. 
Like spreading out multiple M72s across a squad. Three of these squads make up the core of a 
platoon. They’re accompanied by a Support Squad,   which is commanded by the Assistant Platoon Leader   typically ranking Junior Warrant 
Officer. The squad has 8 personnel,   and serves an LM-60 60mm mortar and a GSBO-40 
standalone grenade launcher, plus a Combat Medic. Meanwhile, in 1st Squad’s vehicle, the 
Platoon Leader acts as vehicle commander   and also has a Radio Operator to 
accompany them on the dismount. Three platoons form the close combat 
element of the mechanized or motorized   company. Company leadership, including 
the company commander and their deputy,   ride in their own individual combat 
vehicles with 10 people between them. The Company Chief, equivalent to a first 
sergeant or company sergeant major,   leads the 6-man logistics team. They set 
up company logistics resupply points,   like for ammo, fuel and water, and 
are equipped with two off-road trucks. The Company Technician meanwhile leads 
an armored recovery squad, tasked with   recovering stuck vehicles and performing 
limited maintenance work. In BMP units,   they’re doctrinally meant to have an armored 
recovery variant of the MT-LB called the WPT,   while motorized units are meant to have the 
technical reconnaissance variant of the Rosomak. Motorized Infantry Platoons are similar. 
Although equipped with the wheeled KTO Rosomak,   armed with a 30mm autocannon and the option for 
SPIKE missiles. They ironically have a superior   IFV in almost every way to the mechanized troops. 
However, doctrinally, their squads lose the last   rifleman and instead have a dedicated vehicle 
commander in addition to the gunner. This is   enabled by the Rosomak’s 2-man turret, and is a 
departure from the old Soviet way of IFV crewing.   One assumes that when the Borsuk replaces 
the BMP-1, they’ll adopt a similar approach. Additionally at the platoon-level, the 
Support Squad serves a tripod-mounted Mk   19 automatic grenade launcher rather than 
the stand-alone single-shot launcher. But   otherwise they doctrinally still 
have a 60mm mortar and medic. Four companies form the core 
of an infantry battalion,   led and supported by a Command Company that 
includes command and logistics elements,   traffic control, a recon platoon and a sniper 
squad with 4x .50 caliber sniper rifles. Battalions include a Support Company, 
whose 2 mortar platoons ideally provide   the battalion with a total of 8x M120 
Rak 120mm self-propelled mortars,   and whose anti-tank platoon provides 
6 SPIKE anti-tank guided missiles. They further have a Logistics Company,   providing supply and maintenance 
support, plus a medical section. In total, each battalion would ideally have 56 
BMPs or Rosomaks and in the area of 760 soldiers,   although during wartime mass mobilization might 
see the filling out of understrength units. But at the brigade-level there is more variation. 
Each brigade generally had 3 maneuver battalions   before 2022. Armored Cavalry Brigades and 
Armored Brigades, which are tank heavy, had   2 tank battalions and 1 mechanized battalion on 
BMP-1, while depending on the context, mechanized   brigades could 2 mechanized and 1 tank battalion, 
or 3 mechanized or motorized battalions, or more. However, there is a plan to bring brigades to 
a 4 battalion standard and some brigades have   already made the transition. Based on comments 
made by the Polish defense ministry in the past,   this could mean 4 motorized battalions for lighter   brigades and 2 tank and 2 mechanized 
infantry battalions for heavier brigades. But regardless, brigades are supported by 
a Self-Propelled Artillery Battalion, like   in other countries to the east literally called a 
“division”. Their three batteries each serve eight   2S1 122mm SPGs, for a total of 24 tubes in the 
battalion. Mechanized Brigades with mainly wheeled   Rosomak battalions, like the 17th Mechanized 
Brigade, have Dana 152mm wheeled SPGs in lieu. And then there’s an Air Defense Battalion,   with a minimum of 24 Grom man-portable 
air defense systems or MANPADS.   Armored brigades also have 12 Biała self-propelled 
anti-aircraft guns, while mechanized brigades   have 24 truck-mounted combo systems that 
include 23mm cannons and Grom AA missiles. Rounding it out, brigades 
have a reconnaissance company,   engineer battalion and logistics battalion. At the highest level, three maneuver brigades 
generally make-up a division, although in the   future it is planned for divisions to be based on 
4 maneuver brigades of 4 maneuver battalions each. Poland’s four maneuver divisions were its 
largest tactical units before 2023. The   11th Armoured Cavalry Division in the southwest, 
the 12th Mechanised Division in the northwest,   the 16th Mechanized Division in the 
northeast near the border with Kaliningrad,   and the 18th Mechanized Division in the 
east and southeast. The 18th Mechanized   was the newest division, formed in 2018 
to fill the gap left by the disbandment   of the 1st Mechanized in 2011. It just 
reached operational capability in 2021,   so its units are underdeveloped. In response to 
the ongoing conflict, Poland announced its plan   to form two new divisions as well. One will be the 
1st Legions Infantry Division in the northeast,   partially formed from units of the 16th Division. 
It will cover the area between the 16th and 18th. In the future, the goal is for the 18th Mechanized 
to operate the M1A2 Abrams and the 16th Mechanized   to operate the K2PL. The 16th Mechanized 
currently operates PT-91 Twardy battalions,   which are likely subjects of weapons transfer in 
the future. The 1st Legions Infantry meanwhile   will operate a mix of K2s and Abrams, while the 
Leopard 2A5s that were in the 18th Mechanized   will be shifted to the 11th Armored Cavalry 
Division near the border with Germany. This   division already operates Leopard 2PLs and Leopard 
2A4s waiting to be upgraded to the 2PL standard. I should mention that in my Polish 
tank video I made a while back,   I erroneously stated that the 
12th Mechanized Division had   a PT-91 battalion. They actually had a 
battalion of T-72M1Rs, which are now gone. Polish maneuver brigades are currently 
supported by a divisional Artillery   Regiment. Artillery Regiments generally have 4 
artillery battalions, sporting a mix of 152mm   howitzers like the Dana and or 155mm like the 
Krab, as well as rocket artillery battalions. Also in the division is an Anti-Aircraft 
Regiment, featuring Osa, Kub and more   Grom surface-to-air missiles; as well as a 
Logistics Regiment and Command Battalion. Before closing out I just want to thank 
my Patrons. My videos haven’t been doing   too hot recently and Patreon gives me an 
added layer of financial stability. And   now that you have an idea of Poland’s infantry 
units, check out this earlier video where we   cover Poland’s tank unit structure from the 
platoon to brigade. We’ll see you over there.|||Justyna : I believe how now... Justyna : You stand and sing whatever you want acapella... Justyna : It will be a hundred times better than performing this song. Justyna : You can prove it to all those who have not turned away. Baron : Sure. Baron : We'd love to hear from you. Justyna : Some great soul number that you love... Rafaela : Acapella... Justyna : No, it doesn't have to be acapella, say maybe just... Lanberry : Perhaps bend... bend will join... will join. Rafaela : "I Have Nothing"? All coaches : Wow! Baron : As much? Lanberry : OH! we turn into ears! Baron : Wait, let's fasten our seat belts because it's going to sweep! Lanberry : Yes... because there will be a take-off... of a jet. Lanberry : Wow!|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Baby, it's kind of crazy, How else to phrase it? With you, I’ve lost my senses, Baby, what happened to ya? I thought I knew ya, But now it's time to face it You're hot and cold High and you’re low, Messing with my mind No-oh-oh, that's not how it goes, So let me spell it out Now I'm better solo, solo I never let me down, didi, down, down, down, And now I'm gonna show ya, show ya Show you what it is you're missing out, Now I'm better solo, solo I never let me down, down, didi, down, down, down Now I'm gonna show ya, show ya, How I be getting down solo Tell me, Now was it worth it? Oh, playin' me dirty But now who’s laughing, baby?, Watch me All eyes on me now Bet you regret how What goes around comes around You’re hot and cold, High and you're low, Messing with my mind No-oh-oh, that’s not how it goes, So let me spell it out Now I'm better solo, solo I never let me down, didi, down, down, down, And now I'm gonna show ya, show ya Show you what it is you're missing out, Now I’m better solo, solo I never let me down, down, didi, down, down, down Now I'm gonna show ya, show ya, How I be getting down solo No, no, I'm going solo, Yeah, you better, better, watch me now 'Cause I know how to let go, Gonna make it, make it on my own Oh, oh no, I'm going solo, Yeah, you better, better, watch me now 'Cause I know how to let go, So it's clear to see I'm Now I'm better solo, solo I never let me down, didi, down, down, down, And now I'm gonna show ya, show ya Show you what it is you're missing out, Now I'm better solo, solo I never let me down, down, didi, down, down, down Now I'm gonna show ya, show ya, How I be getting down solo Blanka - Solo Lyrics by Rap Samurai|||From the depths of history, from the dark lands The eternal virgin forests, fields and steppes Our lineage, our beginning, Yonder, from royal Piast blood, Krakus, Lech. A long chain of human existence Linked by a simple idea. So that Poland, so that Poland, So that Poland would be Polish! So that Poland, so that Poland, So that Poland would be Polish! Then when the unknown fate Scattered us over the corners, When foreign winds blew, Foreign eagles on banners lay, Beside campfires burst forth, The immortal native melody. So that Poland, so that Poland, So that Poland would be Polish! So that Poland, so that Poland, So that Poland would be Polish! A student threw down the tzar's portrait, Priest Ściegienny lead the prayers, Drzymała's wagon made it's mark, Proud poems were written by Norwid. And whoever could wield a saber Formed a legion, an army. So that Poland, so that Poland, So that Poland would be Polish! So that Poland, so that Poland, So that Poland would be Polish! Mothers, wives in dark chambers Embroidered the banners with the motto: "Honor and Fatherland" And into the fields set out the faith And the faith set out into the fields From Chicago to Tobolsk. So that Poland, so that Poland, So that Poland would be Polish! So that Poland, so that Poland, So that Poland would be Polish! So that Poland, so that Poland, So that Poland would be Polish! So that Poland, so that Poland, So that Poland would be Polish!|||In this video series I analyze how different
countries would look like in their greater version today. Don't take it too seriously, it's just a thought
experiment using a lot of imagination. In the last video we analyzed Greater Luxembourg
- but also the country of Poland is not spared from our thought experiment. Therefore, we’ll transform Poland from Europe's
ninth largest country into a great empire, which its neighboring countries should rather
not mess with. Greater Poland is also the name of an administrative
region of Poland - but this video is not about this region, but instead about a larger version
of Poland. Poland experienced a vivid history during
the last centuries, marked by times of maximum expansion to times when it didn't even exist. But today marks the end of that - because
today we give Poland the greatness it deserves. Therefore, we take a look at the history book
and use the republic of Poland-Lithuania as a starting point. The multi-ethnic state had the largest extension
in 1619 and although Poland did not control all parts directly, we want to think big in
this video and put the entire territory under Polish sovereignty. Taking a look at the maps allows us to grasp
the full dimensions of Greater Poland. It stretches from Estonia through the remaining
Baltic States, Belarus, today's Poland, Russia and Ukraine, thus controlling almost 1,000,000
square kilometers of land, more than 3 times larger than present-day Poland. Likewise, about 80 million people now call
Greater Poland their home, more than double that today. Thus, Greater Poland has risen from the ninth
largest country in Europe to Europe's second largest country - behind the european part
of russia - and has moved up from 9th place within Europe by population to 4th place. Furthermore, it now controls not only large
areas of fertile Ukrainian black soil, but also virtually all overland trade between
Russia and the rest of Europe. Access to the Black Sea is narrowly denied
to Greater Poland, but it has a long coastline to the Baltic Sea. Also, coal reserves in western Russia now
fall under Greater Polands territory, as well as gas, coal and oil reserves in Ukraine. We have thus transformed Poland into one of
the biggest players on the stage of Europe’s super powers. A fact worth knowing is that Poland-Lithuania
was unique in Europe in terms of confessional diversity. The spectrum of religions ranged from Judaism
to Protestantism, Catholicism, Orthodoxy and Islam, all of which coexisted peacefully and,
despite the dominance of Catholicism, enjoyed politically supported religious freedom - and
this in times when conflicts caused by religion were very common. Another interesting fact is that Poland-Lithuania
had an impressive army, which was also essential for the defense of the vast territories of
the country. The Winged Hussars were feared throughout
Europe for their speed, effectiveness, and yes, for those artistic wings. You should rather avoid them if your life
is important to you. But even they could not stop the partitioning
of Poland in the late 18th century.|||In the Polish campaign the 
German forces were stronger,   but they did not have an overwhelming 
numerical superiority over the Poles,   so why did it take the Germans only more 
than a month to completely defeat Poland?   The Germans had two key advantages: their army was 
larger and had better equipment than Polish forces   and also the Germans possessed tanks, which would 
give them greater punch and much faster movement.   Poland used two strategies to counter the 
German advantages. The Poles had made an   alliance with Britain and France so that they 
could put pressure on Germany from the West.   In this way Germany would have to keep a large 
part of their forces there and could not deploy   a strong force against Poland. In order to 
counter Germany's superior offensive capabilities,   such as tanks, Poland had adopted another 
strategy. It had created two defensive lines.   The main line was behind the Vistula river 
and its tributaries and they could retreat   to a shorter line on the Romanian bridgehead, if 
things went badly. But there was a problem. Poland   could not start the war with all of its forces 
deployed behind its defences. Otherwise there   was a chance that Germany could capture part of 
the Polish territory without fighting and Britain   and France would not declare war on Germany. So 
Poland deployed its forces forward to the border   to receive the German attack and make Britain 
and France declare war on Germany. After that   they would have to make a difficult retreat 
under German pressure to their main defences. On   September 1st 1939 the Germans launched the attack 
along the whole front. The Poles had established   an intermediary defensive line, where they planned 
to halt the initial German advance. In the North   the Germans encircled some of the Polish units and 
reestablished land connection with East Prussia.   In the South the Germans reached the 
Southernmost part of the Polish defensive line.   They then launched several tank attacks against 
it. In the South and Center the Poles were able to   contain the Germans, but in the North the Polish 
lines were broken. The Poles had their reserves   ready to cover the Northern direction. They also 
pulled back their forces in the South. Soon the   reatereting forces ran into trouble, as they were 
pursued by fast moving German tanks. In the North   the Polish reserves reestablished the front line 
and for some days could continue the withdrawal.   But then the German tanks broke through once 
again. This time the Poles did not have any   reserves to send against them. By that time Poland 
might have benefitted from a French attack on the   Western front, but the Allies had not expected the 
events to take place so quickly and did not give   effective assistance to Poland. Polish forces 
decided to launch a desperate counterattack   against the German forward units to allow their 
forces to escape. However, most of the Polish   units were too disorganized to counterattack and 
in the South their forces were encircled. The   Polish counterattack in the North allowed some of 
the Polish forces to withdraw to the Warsaw area,   but soon the Germans turned their attention 
towards the counterattacking force and cut it off.   The Germans succeeded in their plan to cut off 
most of the Polish forces before they could reach   their main defenses. By that time they had already 
breached the Polish defenses from the North.   Ten days earlier the Germans had reached the 
Polish main defensive line from the North.   The Poles misjudged the situation and their troops 
were out of position, which allowed the Germans to   find a weak spot in the Polish defences and cross 
the river. The Poles attempted to make a stand   behind another river line, but the Germans used 
momentum to cross it before the Poles had readied   their defences. The main Polish defensive 
line was now breached from the North. The   Polish forces were now ordered to retreat to their 
final defensive line at the Romanian bridgehead.   Part of them ignored the order and remained to 
defend Warsaw. During that time the Polish units   in the South had been falling back. The Poles 
were not able to hold a solid front and the faster   moving German units bypassed them and crossed the 
main Polish defensive line with little opposition.   They now moved to capture the center of the 
Polish resistance at Lwow. The Germans were   unable to take Lwow, but they cut off the Polish 
units that attempted to fall back to the town.   The Germans were now in position to 
prevent the rest of the Polish army   from reaching the Romanian bridgehead. The 
next Polish forces approached from the West.   The Germans moved in from several directions 
and cut the Poles off from all sides.   After the Poles could not break through the German 
defences, they surrendered. The Germans were not   in a good position to easily destroy the Polish 
forces coming from the North. But by that time the   Soviet Union had joined the conflict and attacked 
the undefended Polish border from the East. The   Red Army quickly advanced and cut off the retreat 
path South for the Polish forces. The Poles had   no choice but to break through the Soviet or 
German lines to escape to the South. They chose   to attack the Germans, but they were unable to 
break through and surrendered. With that most   of the largest formations of the Polish army had 
been destroyed. Without any help from the outside,   the Polish defenders in Warsaw surrendered to 
the Germans. By early October the Soviets and   the Germans had finished mopping up the remaining 
Polish forces and the campaign was over. So,   why was Poland defeated only in a month? You 
can see from the campaign that the reasons the   Poles hoped to win the war did not come into play. 
Poland gave up its defensive positions in order to   be sure to get the help from Britain and France. 
But no one expected the Germans to advance so fast   and Britain and France were not ready to give 
Poland significant aid so early. So Poland could   not utilize the foreign aid nor its defensive 
advantages. Meanwhile the Germans could make full   use of their stronger army and tank formations 
and this resulted in a quick Polish defeat.   It is time to pay respects to the E company for 
its contribution to the coverage of the Polish   campaign. You may want to join its ranks, 
as in the next episode, we will continue   on our way East to look at a long, but often 
overlooked conflict between two great powers.|||I hope you will do better. We showed you a musical trip this time. - Is there more Chopin? / - No. The second half in Poland will be a historical trip. You may think history is boring at first but it's fun if you go there and experience it yourself. - Of course. / - The musical trip was enjoyable. And I can't wait to watch the historical trip now. We give you... - The second half of Poland. / - Okay. It's the second day in Warsaw. (Good morning) It's great to be on a trip with my good friend and relax in the park. That looks nice. It looks like they're shooting a commercial. That's right. Do you carry your personal lightings? Is there a reflector below? I admit they are beautiful. I really wanted to come to Europe but now that I'm here, it doesn't seem real. Though it's a weekday, people don't seem to be bustling around. Did you just drink coffee and eat bread since it's morning? We had a musical trip yesterday. It will be a historical trip today. We'd like to visit places other than Warsaw too. Are there any places you'd like to recommend? Yes, there is one. It's Krakow. - Krakow? / - Krakow. - Krakow. / - Krakow is... The old capital of Poland. The history of Poland is mostly there. So there are a lot of things to see and eat. - What is that? / - What is it? - It's like Gyeongju in Korea? / - It's a historical city. The hot-air balloons will be impressive. - Did they ride it? / - That looks amazing. - That'll be amazing. / - It will be. (Soboru Tour's historical trip) Shall we go take a train? - Great. / - Let's go. (A train to Krakow) How long does it take by train? Two hours. Two hours? The train is arriving. It looks like KTX. It does. It's a high-speed train. It's an express train and a little more expensive. It costs $80 for a round trip. It's as far as Busan. $80 for a round trip? - A bit more than 2 hours. / - 2 hours 40 minutes? We're moving now. This is amazing. I'm riding a train in Europe. Since I'm riding a train in Europe, it reminds me of "Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind." - You too? / - Right. I heard a snack cart will be here in a while. And we can have water, coffee and tea for free. - It's included in the ticket. / - No need to spend. - Almost everything is free. / - You paid for the toilet. We didn't have to. It was all free. I'll ask for water later. (In a moment) It's coming. They are not all free, right? - They are all free. / - They are. You can just take one out? Yes. They give it to you for free. - Too late. / - That's why it's free. It's too fast. You can't catch it. - If you can catch it, it's free. / - Right. - If you stop it, you have to pay? / - Exactly. (The snack cart is gone with the wind) (I have to drink free water in Europe) (Soeun passes out frowning) - She looks serious. / - She's frowning. Maybe because she couldn't drink the water. Do I look okay on screen? This is a train trip in Poland with Boah. Ta-da. - It's gorgeous. / - How beautiful. - What a beautiful sight. / - Look at the clouds. - Water is here. / - Water. - Grab a bottle. / - Nice timing. Water is here. (Goal achieved) After a two-hour ride from Warsaw, we arrived in Krakow. It only took two hours. - It did. / - It doesn't take long. It was the capital in the past. Right. It's not crowded and it looks so nice. And the outdoor cafes are gorgeous. They can be called as pioneers because... - Poland is not introduced a lot. / - Right. I think it's the first time to be introduced in detail. Tell me about it. Don't those kinds of squares look so good? - So beautiful. / - Squares in Europe are beautiful. The square is very big. Gosh. Look at that. I saw it from a distance and it was so beautiful. Look at that. It's amazing. It's so tall. The buildings are so elaborate. They look so antique. Now that we're here, let's try pizza bread that is famous in Krakow. Bread? Did you know we didn't have lunch? - I know. Let's eat it. / - Frankly, I'm hungry now. - Please eat something. / - Let's go immediately. We should start with eating. Pizza bread is here. It smells so good. It's the smell of pizza bread. (This Poland pizza bakery opened in 1980) (Apple juice is a must) They make it fresh. - It's fresh fruit juice. / - No ingredients are added. They only put in apples. - They just squeeze it. / - They grind the peels too. (How does it taste?) It's good. Two apples are in here. There were only 3 or 4 apples and nothing else. - How expensive is it? / - It's only $1.80? - The prices are so low. / - Just $1.80... For freshly squeezed juice? The pizza bread seems so delicious. (Pizza bread is a must as well) (Zapiekanka is a light Polish snack) (With onion, cheese and mushrooms on a baguette) (It's so good that it makes you dance) Do you know funghi pizza? It tastes like that. I like it because the baguette is not too thick. It's crispier than I thought. Baguettes are usually hard. This is a baguette, right? Yes, it's a baguette. It's good. It's so delicious. Now... I would have eaten at least two if I had been there. Shall we take a look around now? That's Main Market Square, the biggest medieval square left in Europe. There are a lot of flowers here. They are beautiful. It's strange when girls walk around holding hands. One is a manly trip and the other is a girly trip. - Indeed. / - See? I told you, shopping is better than Chopin. Awesome. Can I try it on? How do I look? I look like a maid of honor, don't I? - It looks good on you. / - Does it? (Similar flower hairbands but so different) Who was that? - It was you. / - Was it? It's pretty. Hello. Look at them. Look at the carriages. Looking around this square and Wawel Royal Castle, riding a carriage is a tourist attraction in here. I heard tourists always ride this carriage. What do you think? We should ride it. Sure. - They match your outfit perfectly. / - They are cute. I feel like I'm getting married or something. Hi. (Welcome) The black horses look cool. They look like princesses. I really like this. Hello. This is a rare experience. When will we ever ride on a carriage like this? I feel like an aristocrat. - Your outfit and garland fits too. / - You're right. - Where is this place? / - This place is so nice. - This is fun. / - It is. It's even fast. (The carriage stops) Is this subway running above the ground? - It's a tram. / - Tram. - This place also has a tram. / - That's also cheap. It's pretty. They all have flower pots up there. They're blowing bubbles. Children will like that. (Every sight is like a scene from a picture) This is Soeun's first time to Europe. - It's more thrilling for her. / - I completely fell in love. It's perfect to go with your lover. - It's perfect. / - Isn't it perfect for a honeymoon? You can ride a carriage and the food is so cheap. This is romantic. This is what I thought Europe would be like. It's so nice. It looks amazing. Soeun, look at that. What is that? Look at that. - They restored it. / - Yes, they restored it. - They restored it. / - The color of the bricks... Are all different. This also looks like it was restored. I think you're right. The white brick looks restored. I think that Poland works very hard to preserve things from the past. They only repainted it. Other than that, they preserved the old style. Is this the Wawel Royal Castle? They also restored a lot of this. - The colors are different. / - The walls are different. (Krakow is a small but historic medieval city) I'm 29. Why is this my first time in Europe? - You were busy. / - I can only think about that. - You had to work. / - I should have traveled more. You need to go to Europe during your 20s. I started to enjoy traveling after Battle Trip. - Really? / - Whenever I have about 2 days off... - I pack up and go on a trip. / - You go on a trip? - Run. / - We're already here. We're here. Thank you for the ride. Let's get off.|||what's up you guys and welcome back to the channel 
we made our way to Wrocław yesterday evening   so today's our very first 
day here exploring the city   we are blessed with beautiful weather 
as you can see so we're gonna take   you on the journey with us and give you 
our very first impressions of the city   so right now we're in the Rynek or the 
main square of Wrocław and we made   our way here from Bielsko-Biała as naomi just 
said just last night so this is our very first   real raw first impression of Wrocław and the main 
market square or the Rynek is absolutely really   really beautiful as you said we have really 
beautiful sunshine blue skies all around us   today so we couldn't be happier just to be here 
in this amazing city Wrocław is a very highly   recommendable city from a lot of different 
polish people we actually met a polish couple   that lived here while we were traveling through 
albania and they said you have to come and see   this city it is supposedly one of the most 
underrated cities when we are speaking about   tourist destinations in poland and we can already 
see why just walking through this market square   so let's go and explore a little bit more of 
Wrocław together now whenever we come to a   new city we typically do like to do a little 
bit of research ahead of time just so we know   what sort of city or town that we're getting into 
and i went on to trip advisor just last night   and i typed in Wrocław just to see what would 
come up different recommendations different   things to do etc and i came across a free walking 
tour and i decided to click into the information   scroll down and it turns out that they gave 
all of the must-see stops along the way on   this specific walking tour so i basically went 
in copy paste brought it into the note here on my   iphone and what we're going to do is we're going 
to follow those exact notes bring us through this   great city it says the first thing that you 
have to check out when you come to Wrocław   is apparently some dwarfs that sounds like a very 
interesting first thing to do so that's what we're   gonna go and do now we're gonna try and find a 
couple of these little pesky dwarfs let's go you   can actually type in dwarfs into the map go into 
google maps and the very first dwarfs that came up   for us were handicapped dwarves and we just found 
them one of them is hard of hearing one of them   is blind and i think one of them is sitting in 
a wheelchair there's currently some kids there   but we're gonna check the handicapped dwarves 
out there while looking for the dwarfs as well   i just realized there all of the fronts of the of 
the buildings here in this market square are just   so beautiful all of them kind of have different 
colors some of them have some more no thank you   somebody's trying to give me a rose no thank you 
okay so um anyway some of them are a little bit   more simple but colorful and others have like 
a lot of details going on there as well so   all of the housing fronts here in the market 
square are just so so stunning right here just   beside me is an old gothic town hall that 
is now currently an art museum or a museum   that stores a lot of Wrocław's history and it is 
an absolutely amazing looking building there are   so many different sort of sculptures outside on 
the structure of the building itself and the color   of it is very very interesting it's kind of like 
an off shade red or something but you can tell   just by looking at it the history that it must 
have is insane and it is in that old really cool   gothic style directly in front of this beautiful 
town hall as well we i just found our second dwarf   and he kind of looks like a little bit of a drunk 
version of a dwarf so he kind of has a glass and   something that looks like a like a bottle of wine 
or something maybe a bottle of beer i don't know   but i think this is really really stunning for 
children as well to be able to go all over town   and just try and find all of the dwarfs everywhere 
and i think it's just so beautiful directly here   at the market square they have this really really 
cool relaxing area as well with a lot of sand and   kind of these sunbathing type of chairs where 
you can just sit back and relax and you have   loads and loads of food stands and drink stands 
all around it so you're definitely not short   of options of what to get i already saw a stand 
for sausages and which i'm already in love with   and one stand with pierogi so maybe that's 
something that we could do later in the video but   not right now and obviously never short of a nice 
Piwo a nice beer it's usually hard to replicate   a certain energy on video for you guys but i don't 
know if you can tell but Wrocław is absolutely   buzzing there's so many people around just out and 
about and enjoying the day obviously the weather   is beautiful um it is only a tuesday so we're 
only coming up to like the middle of the work week   there is plenty of tourists i'm hearing plenty 
of german french all sorts of different tourists   walking through the market square and there's 
so many different things that you can check out   and do here plenty of different market stalls 
it almost kind of feels like christmas market   but it's not it's like a summer market but you 
can tell that they use some of the same stalls   i'm just seeing a stand there with loads 
and loads of smoked hams and salami and   those types of stands especially 
if they have olives as well are   usually the death of me because 
i just want to eat everything   the city of Wrocław is definitely one of 
those cities where if you are into social   media and you're into taking pictures for 
instagram you are in the right city because   everywhere you turn every street that 
you look at is just very photogenic and   photographic it's perfect for something like 
your social media page there's so many unique   and interesting looking buildings and streets 
and so many people that are dressed in a very   alternative way so it is definitely a place to add 
to your list if that is something for your travel   criteria we just walked through a small sicilian 
food market and typically if you see these types   of italian or spanish markets the people are 
not actually italian or spanish but in this case   all of them were italian and this was a 
Sicily specific food market and the   people were actually sicilian one of the guys 
sounded like my grandpa so that made me feel   right at home and they had Cannolies and they 
had arancine and all of these things and i   like my sicilian heart just straight away wanted 
to eat everything so we need to run before i buy   the entire market Wrocław is located on the river 
Oder and there is apparently a bunch of different   little islands one of them is like a cathedral 
island apparently that you have to go and check   out it is in the walking tour that i copy and 
pasted into my phone so we're on our way to the   river Oder and we're gonna go and check out see 
if we can get on a couple of these islands i'm   sure it's pretty spectacular looking right now 
with this weather too oh there's a train coming one thing that i find really funny is as you 
might have seen just on that train there there's   actually a football team so not like soccer 
football as in european football but american   football that is called the Wrocław or Wrocław 
panters similar to the carolina panthers they have   the same colors they have the same logo everything 
looks the same just that it's a polish team i'm   sure if we would stay here for longer we would 
go and check out a match because both of us are   big football fans on our way to the cathedral 
island we stumbled across one of the stops of   that tour that luke keeps talking about which is 
the Ossolineum it is a palace type of building   where you have gardens that you can walk around in 
all of these gardens are really really beautiful   with these types of little hedges that they make 
kind of art out of and it seems to be very very   popular with the people around here because as 
you can see there's loads of people everywhere   and but it's definitely a must see if you do 
come to Wrocław that Ossolineum garden area   there was a beautiful little pit stop along our 
wandering way around Wrocław and we're going   to head back now to the river it's just literally 
across the road from the river itself and we're   going to try and check out this cathedral island 
because it looks pretty interesting we kind of   got the drone up in the air and we could see 
kind of across the way it looks like a really   spectacular looking place plenty of tourists are 
heading in that direction so we may as well follow we just crossed over this really cool looking red 
bridge and it brought us to an actual island but   it's not actually cathedral island we had a look 
on google maps and cathedral island is actually   just over across this island but it is not an 
island so it's like just basically facing where   we're walking to and there's a really really nice 
park that is on this actual island called Wyspa   park or Wyspa park and it seems to be super idyllic 
very beautiful there's plenty of people out and   about today and as you can see by the tram that 
just crossed me there you can take those trams   pretty much anywhere around Wrocław it seems 
because it seems to be a very well connected city   in terms of public transport so that's always a 
big thumbs up from us if you can easily access   everything that you need with public transport 
that is great because typically what we do when   we arrive somewhere new or when we come to a 
new country we try and figure out the public   transport system because it's usually quickest 
cheapest way of getting around and it's a unique   way as well to interact with the locals the Tumski 
bridge here is one of the oldest river crossings   in Wrocław and it connects the cathedral island 
with the sand island this present steel bridge   was built in the years 1888 till 1892 
and it's a really really cool looking   green type of steel bridge it just it looks very 
unique and obviously old so i do think this is   a very very special place to be just in front of 
this very cool Tumski bridge we found this kind of   a sign that is relevant when it comes to the dwarf 
that has the lock on its back that we found in   front of this bridge and it's basically reeds all 
around the world bridges get cluttered with locks   what most people fail to realize is that nothing 
brings worse look to their love than the act of   locking it up in a single metal cage on a bridge 
the rain the river and the moisture quickly caused   the locks to erode and along with the corrosion of 
this lock the hope the true love can survive will   evaporate even faster that's really cool and kind 
of a touching story as well because you do see   that happen quite often on bridges all over europe 
i'm not too sure about the rest of the world but   you do see quite a lot of people locking these 
sort of steel locks onto bridges with their names   and it's like you know eternal love we will be 
in love forever type of thing but that story   just completely destroyed that idea the dwarves 
that helps with setting love free is one of the   interactive types of dwarves you can actually 
pick up the key and try to open the lock obviously   with that little statue it doesn't work but i 
think the thought of that is really beautiful   we just saw a picture there of one of the churches 
here in cathedral island in 1945 and it kind of   looks like the church obviously was bombed during 
the war or something bad happened to it but thank   god they were able to renovate the church and put 
the towers back into place by adding beautiful   steel type of roofs to the two towers and um it's 
just so so stunning i want to go in and actually   check that church out all right guys so it makes 
a little bit more sense now we just had a quick   little bit of a stop to do some research about 
this place cathedral island and it is known as   Ostrów Tumski and it is commonly crossed over into 
on the Tumski bridge which is pedestrian only now   this place used to be an island and so it makes 
a lot of sense it's actually the oldest part of   Wrocław as well so it dates back all the way 
to the 10th century that's pretty incredible   and that is a long long time ago and you can 
see it in a lot of the amazing architecture   on cathedral island all around here in cathedral 
island you have these really interesting wall   markings that will detail you in by all the 
way back in history it brings you back to   Wrocław in 1945 for example and there is 
an image of this building right here with   this statue here too and it is in 1945 and as you 
might be able to tell from the picture this entire   building was completely flattened and destroyed 
by bombs but this statue was completely untouched   so that is absolutely incredible and it's crazy 
just to be standing here and looking at both   pictures and seeing that contrast and how history 
has unfolded here in wroclaw now this is the   church of saint john the baptist and we walked in 
briefly kind of into the first room of the church   if you want to go in all the way and you have to 
pay entry and buy a ticket which is all right we   just didn't do it we chose not to in this case 
because we still have like a long list of things   to do for today and but this church looks so so 
beautiful i can hear the pierogi calling me naomi   whispers of pierogi all right guys so we've 
been walking around Wrocław now for a few hours   around two three hours now we're starting to get 
a little bit hungry it's coming up to like roughly   three o'clock so we're definitely gonna go maybe 
back to this Rynek area the main market square   area see if we can get some nice food because 
that man-made beach where people were chilling   there's plenty of options for some lovely food 
so that's exactly what we're gonna do let's go okay so there in the market square we just 
got um two servings of pierogi one of them   was with meat and the other one was with potatoes 
potatoes yeah potatoes and cheese and potatoes   and cheese i forgot about the cheese yeah and 
they were so so good we actually saw the lady   just there when we were leaving making pierogi 
herself from scratch so it kind of looked like   she was making the dough herself and the filling 
as well and everything around it it was just so   tasty they were absolutely absolutely delicious 
like 10 out of 10 probably one of the best that   i've ever tried and that place is actually really 
beautiful it's like a kind of like a beach area   really just out of this world super cheap as 
well i think it was 40 złoty for a serving of 12   pierogies so we had six each and we definitely 
would go there again i think we will maybe   tomorrow who knows for sure for sure and that 
place actually from what i saw anyway   was a ukrainian place so they had a little sign 
on the top saying Kuchnia Ukrainsko so like   a ukrainian kitchen basically and it was oh my 
god i never had pierogi that were that tasty so   good by the way now that we know what exactly 
we're looking for we're seeing dwarfs or gnomes   all over the city and even like before we started 
the video we actually walked past a few gnomes   without realizing it because we didn't know what 
we were looking for so yeah they're everywhere now let's talk first impressions of Wrocław and 
i personally think that Wrocław should definitely   be on your list of places to visit 
again trying not to get hit by a car  it should be on your list of places to visit 
it should be on the same level as krakow   or maybe warsaw and all of these other very 
well known and very well traveled places   because this city has just so much to offer i kind 
of feel like Wrocław might even have more to offer   than krakow for example but just because it's 
such an expansive city and you can see so many   different areas and like there it kind of seems 
like there's something for everybody like there's   something for people that are interested in nature 
there's arts there's history there's religion kind   of a little bit of everything and i just feel like 
it's the perfect place to be what do you think   yeah day one in Wrocław complete and to be honest 
our first impressions are my first impressions   this place is just a gem i know that it is a 
very well spoken about city and a lot of people   do speak very positively about Wrocław it's 
not like it's totally undiscovered or unknown   it is definitely on people's maps when they come 
to poland and so that's kind of a given but today   we saw a just exactly why so many people come 
and visit this city i totally agree with what   naomi said i personally prefer this to krakow i 
personally prefer this to pretty much everywhere   that i've been actually so far although we 
have been to some really incredible places   such as Bielsko-Biała. Bielsko-Biała stole both 
of our hearts zakopane did the same thing so   it's really impossible when you try to compare 
such different places zakopane and Bielsko-Biała   have nature they have stunning mountains they have 
the tatras in zakopane you've got the beskydy in Bielsko-Biała so there's pros and cons 
to absolutely every place but so far   i am only seeing pros about Wrocław there's 
so many different types of places to get food   and it is a really diverse city as well so super 
positive first impressions for us from Wrocław   i couldn't agree more but that is already 
it from us today you guys very quick first   impressions my name is naomi my name is luke we 
are the two mad explorers and we'll see you guys   in the next video and this is a reminder to keep 
exploring i always forget the last part i thought   i had to say that again okay thanks for watching 
peace i can hear the pierogi calling me naomi whispers of pierogi|||The Polish state was the first nation to fall
in this war, but the Polish people are far from defeated. Fired by vengeance and hope
of liberation, Polish troops fight for the Allied cause. Whether it’s in the skies
over Britain, the hills and valleys of Italy, or the mud and blood of the Eastern Front,
you can be sure there are Poles there fighting. I’m Indy Neidell, this is a World War Two
Special on the Polish Armed Forces in exile. I said armed forces – plural - because after
the dual invasion of Poland by the Wehrmacht and Red Army in September 1939, Polish servicemen
are scattered across Europe and beyond. After the Soviets invade on September 17,
Polish Commander-in-Chief Marshal Edward Rydz-Śmigły orders his troops to do what many other Poles
are doing and save themselves by fleeing to Romania or Hungary. By summer 1940, about
70,000 Polish soldiers have made the journey and many of them are in internment camps.
These, though are apparently quite easy to escape. Franciszek Nedza is one of many who
does so when his hosts simply look the other way. “On every railway station was the police,
checking every train. Before we left camp we dressed in new civilian clothes, poor and
cheap, and we managed to reach Budapest… In Budapest we had to wait for some documents
to cross into Yugoslavia… We crossed the river by boat and on the other side was a
coachman and two horses waiting for us to take us to Zagreb.” After Yugoslavia, France is his final destination.
By April 1940, 45,000 have made it there via land or sea. For many France is the ultimate
destination. Many of them form the core of the new Polish armed force ready to take the
fight to the Germans and win back their homeland. Except their new hosts don’t see things
quite the same way. Polish Prime Minister in Exile Władysław
Sikorski gets on well enough with the French, but they aren’t keen on military offensives
or an independent Polish force. It goes against their hopes for a negotiated settlement...
at Poland’s expense. Nonetheless, the Polish Army in France is growing and growing. The
French have allowed Poles who were already living in the country before the outbreak
of the war to join the force although those working in restricted occupations like mining
have to stay at their jobs. Altogether this means there is a force of about 80,000 Poles
when the Germans invade in May 1940. The Battle of France is a complete disaster
for the Poles. I mean, it’s a complete disaster for all the Allies, but Polish losses are
disproportionately high. The French press the underequipped and undertrained Poles into
the line. Training units like the Polish armoured school and the officer and NCO schools are
pushed into frontline combat. The French also take Polish anti-tank companies and artillery
for themselves. And when hastily installed French Prime Minister
Phillipe Petain asks Germany for an armistice on June 18, the Poles feel totally betrayed.
The next day, Sikorski urges all Poles to evacuate France and head for Britain. Once again, they are on the move. A lot of
the men end up fending for themselves during the dash to the ports. Josef Zachwieja sets
off by car: “The roads were packed with refugees and
pushcarts… After two days we were near to La Rochelle, but the Germans had got there
first, so we were diverted to Bordeaux. We went along the Southern side of the Gironde
to Le Verdon where four British ships were waiting. It took more than half a day to get
loaded. We were attacked by waves of Stukas… while a few boys got hit by machine gun fire,
not a single bomb hit the ships. The nearest thing to a miracle I have ever seen… That
was the 23rd of June. On 26th June we arrived in Liverpool and on my first night in Britain
I slept on a bench in Liverpool football stadium. Next morning, we were put on the train to
Scotland.” He’s one of the lucky ones. Only about a
quarter of the Polish forces make it to Britain, about 20,000 men. Most are taken prisoner,
some escape elsewhere, and some even slip away and join the French Resistance. The Polish
ground forces are formed into the Polish I Corps and guard Scotland against German invasion.
Really, they are little more than a division. But the impressive title keeps morale up,
and compared to the British Home Guard the well trained and experienced Poles are nothing
to be sneered at. The Corps will never fight as a single formation, but individual units
will be attached to other Allied forces later in the war. Looking ahead a little to 1942,
these units will be the 1st Polish Armoured Division, 1st Independent Rifle Brigade, 1st
Independent Parachute Brigade, and the Training Brigade. The Polish Navy is also in Britain. They actually
escaped Poland back in 1939. They have three destroyers and two submarines and have seen
action in the invasion of Norway and the evacuation from France. They will continue fighting alongside
the Royal Navy until the end of the war. In 1940 and 1941, though, it’s the Polish
pilots who steal the show. They fight in two Polish squadrons, 302 Poznanski and 303 Kosciuszko.
At the height of the Battle of Britain in September 1940, Polish pilots form 12% of
Fighter Command’s strength. 303 squadron are the highest scoring in the RAF. Head of
Fighter Command Hugh Dowding later writes “had it not been for the magnificent work
of the Polish squadrons and their unsurpassed gallantry, I hesitate to say that the outcome
of the Battle would have been the same." So, the Polish pilots are winning hearts in
Britain. But some of their countrymen are in a truly miserable situation. We’ve talked before about the Katyn Massacre
of 22,000 Polish officers, police, and intellectuals in 1940, but there are still approximately
2 million Polish men, women, and children being held in prisons and labour camps across
the USSR. The British and the Polish government in exile in London reckon that between 100,000
and 250,000 could be suitable for military service. Sikorski has been pressing the British
to help him tap into that pool of manpower. The problem is that Josef Stalin doesn’t
recognise Sikorski’s government in exile. All this changes when Germany invades the
Soviet Union and Stalin finds himself in alliance with the Poles. On July 30 1941, Sikorski
and the Soviet ambassador to Britain Ivan Mayski re-establish relations. Their agreement
grants amnesty to Polish citizens held in the USSR from whom a Polish Army can be established
on Soviet territory. After much negotiating, the British and the Poles manage to ensure
that this Polish Army will be loyal solely to Sikorski’s government. From there, things move slowly and painfully.
Poles released from captivity make their way to recruitment camps northeast of Stalingrad.
By November these hold about 40,000 men and women. Sikorski chooses General Władysław Anders
to command this army. He decides to move his forces to various military camps in the ‘stans.
Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, and Kyrgyzstan. Polish soldiers and civilians make arduous
journeys from across the USSR. Kazimerz Szmid is a Polish teenager who is separated from
his family while travelling to Uzbekistan: “The trains were totally unreliable... I
can't begin to describe the absolute mess, confusion and uncertainty that existed. At
a place called Kuybyshev, my father and I left to find some food and when we returned
the train had departed with my mother and younger sister. We tried to catch up, but
this was an impossible task. At this point my father became ill and eventually died,
I don't know where. I buried him and was on my own. What I did to survive I would not
rather talk about… The hunger was unbearable, and I would lie there thinking what I would
give for a piece of bread.” Things aren’t all that much better when
the Poles arrive in Central Asia. The Soviets are only supplying rations for 44,000 even
though Anders has 70,000 military personnel and tens of thousands of civilians by the
spring of 1942. Hunger and sickness are rife, and the dead fill newly built Polish cemeteries. Anders wants to get his people out of the
USSR. Not only are they dying before they even make it to the battlefield, but he also
believes that the new German offensive – Fall Blau – will overrun the Soviet Union. But
Sikorski wants to have Poles fighting on the Eastern Front alongside the Soviets. It’s
good for the alliance, keeping both Stalin and Churchill happy. In March, Anders manages
to get permission from Stalin to evacuate 44,000 military personnel to the British part
of occupied Iran. It helps that by now Churchill wants extra manpower in North Africa and the
Middle East. The first evacuation begins on March 24 and
Anders pushes his luck and evacuates 45,000 military personnel and over 25,000 civilians.
It's a real slog of a journey crossing Soviet central Asia in trucks and railway cattle
cars and then by steamship over the Caspian Sea. The final destination is the Iranian
part of Pahlevi. Adela Krasnopolska remembers the sea voyage: “We left the Soviet Union,
that inhuman land. We sailed through the Caspian Sea to Persia and Iraq. Some people on the
ship died during the voyage, and their bodies were thrown into the sea.” Anders receives
permission to evacuate the rest of the Poles between July and September. By the end he
has evacuated 114,500 people. 78,000 are servicemen and women. The rest are civilians. Once the Poles are in Iran, the British sort
them into a fighting force, but again, the Poles find themselves in disagreement with
an ally. Sikorski wants an army of two corps, each
of two divisions, plus a brigade of tanks for a total of about 55,000 men. But after
their ordeal, so many of the Poles are unfit for service that the British believe only
a single corps of two infantry divisions and a brigade of tanks is possible. Churchill
says he’s been waiting for the Poles for two years and he won’t wait any longer for
reinforcements. It's not just military disagreements either. News of the Katyn massacre emerges
in April 1943 and the Polish government immediately calls for an independent Red Cross investigation.
Churchill tries pushing them in the other direction, telling Sikorski “If they are
dead, nothing you can do will bring them back.” Sikorski withdraws his demand for an investigation
on the condition that the Anglo-Americans press Stalin to release more Poles held in
the USSR. See, the Soviets have declared that hundreds of thousands of Poles are not covered
by the amnesty either for technical reasons or because they are under investigation by
the Soviet state. But even though Sikorski gives up his demand for a Red Cross investigation,
the Soviets break off relations with the Polish Government on April 24. This will have huge
ramifications pretty soon. Back in the Middle East, Anders’ Army goes
from Iran to Iraq and then Palestine. Here they merge with the Carpathian Brigade in
June. Backtracking just a bit here, the Carpathian
Brigade is made up of Poles who escaped Romania and Hungary into the Middle East. The Brigade
had been serving with the French in Syria at the time of the Armistice in 1940. After
this, they escaped to British Palestine. Composed of about 5,000 men and officers they fought
well in North Africa alongside British and Commonwealth forces against the Axis. Since
March 1942 they’ve been back in Palestine waiting for something to do. Anders’ Army and the Carpathian Brigade
become Polish II Corps. Initially, it consists of three units. The Carpathian brigade is
expanded into the 3rd Carpathian Infantry Division. The two others are the 5th Kresowa
Infantry Division and the 2nd Polish Armoured Brigade. And that pretty much brings us to where we
are now, December 1943 when the Carpathians start arriving in Italy. The rest of the Corps
will follow early next year. The Poles won’t see battle until March and their baptism of
fire will be in May at a place called Monte Cassino. Every step they take is one step
closer to liberating their home, right? Well, not quite. Poland is in the middle of
a tug-of-war between the Western Powers and the Soviet Union. Remember how Stalin let Anders’ Army go?
Well, he’s been busy creating a replacement. You see there are some, not many, but some
Polish officers and men who didn’t want to leave the Soviet Union. About sixty of
the officers responded positively to Soviet ideals during their captivity. There are also
still lots of Poles left scattered across the USSR. Back in May, one of those officers named Colonel
Zygmunt Berling was chosen by Stalin to lead something called the First Tadeuz Kosciuszko
Infantry Division. The Division is under the political control of the Union of Polish Patriots,
an organisation of Polish Communists in the USSR. The soldiers took an oath of “fidelity
to the alliance with the Soviet Union and adherence to the brotherhood of arms of the allied Red
Army.” The Polish Government in London is enraged and sentences Berling to death in
absentia. The division sees its first action at the
Battle of Lenino. The Soviets aren’t hugely successful at attracting Poles, though. I
mean, 3/4 of its senior officers are Soviet citizens. But the force is growing and by
next year it will be expanded into an Army Corps of about 80,000 men. Berling’s Army really isn’t representative
of Poland. But they are pushing westward with the Red Army. Stalin has set up his own Soviet-friendly
Polish government in exile and this new military force will help him stake his claim to Poland.
Anders’ men have gone through hell to get to where they are now. Soon they’ll be throwing
themselves at the German defensive lines in Italy. They hope that the Western Allies will
reward their service with a liberated Poland. But as the saying goes, possession is nine
tenths of the law. Their sacrifice might all be for nothing if Stalin’s men make it to
Warsaw first. Only time will tell. If you want to learn more about the Katyn
Massacre, here’s an episode from our War Against Humanity series from when it came
to light. For more specials like this, well, for more content in general, join the TimeGhost
Army at Timeghost.tv or Patreon.com, that’s what makes this possible. See you next time.|||Hi everybody, this Eva zu Beck for DW Travel 
and dzień dobry from Poland! Today I want to show you the most 
beautiful village in the entire country but before we head over there, 
let me take you on a super quick tour of Kraków,  the cultural capital of Poland. Let's go! Kraków pops up on most 
travel itineraries in Poland, thanks to its rich history and fairy tale beauty. The entire old town is a 
UNESCO World Heritage Site with architecture dating back
to medieval and renaissance times. In fact, Kraków as a city 
is so old that it predates  the official establishment
of Poland as a country. Honestly, it's hard not to love it here. But today, I'm on my way to a very different
kind of place, a two-hour drive away from Kraków. It's a little less grand than the big city,
maybe, but it has an intriguing story of its own. Allright, it looks like we've just arrived here in Zalipie.  Zalipie, by the way, it's considered to be 
Poland's most beautiful village. I see a map over there,
so let's stop for a second and see what exactly we can check out here. It looks like these are all the houses that
we can see here, so we are right here right now. There's a museum over there on the other side
of the village, and all of these colorful points  are private houses, privately owned homes which are decorated 
in the traditional Zalipian style. So let's start at the beginning. Somewhere right here. It's helpful to have a map, 
but my favorite way to explore new places is to simply get lost in them. Zalipie is a small village 
with a very specific claim to fame. It first appeared on the tourist radar about
ten years ago when the story of these painted houses  became widely shared in Poland. We will go to that story a little bit later in the episode. For now, let's take a look around! So, looks like this courtyard is empty, there's
nobody here, but the gate is open to visitors, and there's a lot of people who come and check
out the beautiful paintings on the houses, so I think I will just gonna go inside. Wow, this place is absolutely
beautiful. Come take a look! I know it doesn't really look like it, 
but this is a door that leads to a cellar. It's probably the most beautiful cellar door
I've ever seen in my life. Check this out, all of these colours, all of 
these flowers are hand-painted by the people who live in this house. So you've got really
lovely summer motives, you've got sunflowers, you've got orange, and red, and purple flowers. You can see that the people who create these
paintings really care a lot about keeping up tradition.  And that's just not something
that you see every day anymore. Can I take this with me? Check this out. I'm super excited to show you this house specifically. So I'm Polish, and my great-grandma 
used to live in a house similar to this one. A house like this in Poland is called a khata
and khatas are traditional wooden cottages with thatched roofs, so this is what that is. 
And in addition, because it's in Zalipie, this khata is also painted. It's so awesome, honestly, I wish I could
just take this house, move in and live in it. It's so cute. This isn't like the cutest home 
you've ever see in your life? Some people here in the village have found a way to commemorate the floral tradition of Zalipie. The lady that owns this house has learned
the craft of painting flowers from her grandma, and she inherited this beautiful home.  So now she runs a little shop 
with handpainted souvenirs. And she makes all sorts of different
beautiful things in her own signature style. And I think the best thing for me 
about this room is this spot right here. I don't know if you know what this is, but
it's a traditional old-school Polish oven. In here you make bread,
pancakes, potatoes, anything. This is basically a kitchen,
you can also sleep on top. Again, I remember my great-grandma 
had an oven like this in her house,  and we used to sit on top of it 
on really cold winter days and warm ourselves up. Obviously, it serves a slightly different purpose here. I want to take a look at some of the handmade
souvenirs that the lady has gotten in here. So, initially, before coming to the village
of Zalipie, I was a little bit worried  that this place will be super touristy, but being
here right now, it's completely not like that. You know, there's a real sense that it is
an actual normal village which it is. Some of the houses are painted, others are not 
and the people who live in this village  are just normal ordinary people. So it feels 
really natural and cool and welcoming. And a little bit special without any of that 
touristy artifice that you see in some places. After spending a couple of hours
in the village, I met up with Maria, one of the traditional painters from Zalipie. I wanted to ask her how
the flower paintings came about and what the newfound wave 
of tourism means to the village. I'm here with Maria, who is about to show
me the local art of painting flowers. So I'm about to learn something. I've got this little piece of wood. I've got a brush, we've got some water, 
we got some paints. I think we're ready to get started. So I'm about to paint my second type of flower. Well, it wasn't quite the same level of craft
as the artists from the village,  but let's say it wasn't the worst of my work. So, check this out. I have made this under the very helpful supervision
of Maria, but this is still something I made. The final touch on my masterpiece is to write
the name of the village of Zalipie as a signature. The village of Zalipie is a great example
of responsible tourism done right in Poland. With all the homes and infrastructure in the
hands of locals and a true commitment  to local culture that goes 
beyond catering to tourists, it's one of those rare spots
that feel just natural. As for me, I know that I will be coming back.|||all right that'll be 15 billion dollars plus 
you're doing business with you hold on 15   billion for what I get so lost am I supposed to 
lie about this one 15 billion in Patriot systems   and missiles to add to my growing Arsenal growing 
Arsenal hold on let me look into though my God   you've bought everything ah it's like a little 
European Texas just Ironclad and wishing a [ __ ]   would just like you I'm entitled to make any 
purchases I was bowled over in the last two Civil   Wars it will not happen again this time the speed 
bump has teeth you've bought Patriot you've bought   Aegis ashore you've even invested in a system that 
isn't fully functional yet you bought ibcs before   anybody else in the world yeah sorry about that 
Poland still working out the Kinks there I want   to make sure you got a good system what can I 
say American air defense it works no it doesn't   I continue to destroy oh God will you shut up 
nobody but sub-Saharan Africa believe you anymore   I've destroyed 15 Patriot systems that continue to 
shoot every single day because I don't understand   basic math in Italy so now that Patriots is taken 
care of how about four five Raptors I uh I I don't   think I can do that man I mean even Congress 
has a law in place I can't sell those to anybody   come here little 22 I have Chinese food oh the 
man gets me please let me go no you belong to me   and no one else he just wants you there in case 
Russia ziggs instead of zags and ends up in the   wrong airspace and then you get to introduce them 
to their god promise absolutely and I have candy   oh my God I'm on my way stop it no he's not 
[ __ ] no I'm not but Dad he had candy I will   never fully get how you are so dangerous but so 
gullible Raptor will you help me find my puppy   he is lost oh my God that's so sad yes of course I 
can help will you stop it he will believe anything   no there's no puppy fine but don't be surprised 
if they don't help us when you lose your puppy|||After the death of the Swedish King John III
in the autumn of 1592, his son Sigismund III Vasa was next in line to succeed him. Since Sigismund had been elected as King of
Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania only five years earlier, his accession to the Swedish
throne was set to create a personal union between the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth
and the Kingdom of Sweden. Sigismund sailed with his fleet across the
Baltic Sea in September 1593 and headed for Stockholm with many companions and the most
influential nobles from Poland and Lithuania. However, his arrival meant more than a change
of ruler in Sweden. Since Sigismund was a Catholic and a great
supporter of the Roman Church and the Pope, this represented a significant increase in
the influence of Catholicism in the country. At that time, Sweden was mostly Protestant,
and only a few months before the arrival of Sigismund, under the influence of Duke Charles,
the Uppsala Synod was held, and the Lutheran Church of Sweden decided to make Lutheranism
the state religion. Although he was a staunch Catholic, King Sigismund
of Poland was forced to recognize this decision to be accepted as King of Sweden, setting
the stage for both internal religious conflicts in Sweden and further Wars
between Poland and Sweden. In February 1594, Sigismund was crowned as
King of Sweden and the personal union between  Poland and Sweden became a reality. Shortly after his coronation, Sigismund returned
to Poland and by agreement, he left his uncle Duke Charles and the Swedish Privy Council
to share power over the Scandinavian kingdom because of his stay in Poland. After Sigismund left, the situation in the
country became even more complicated. The Swedes did not have sympathy for their
king, and in 1595 a parliament was held without the presence of Sigismund, making the decision
to appoint Charles as regent of Sweden. In response to this, the Finnish nobility,
supported by King Sigismund, rejected the decision on the grounds that it was illegal
and openly declared Charles a rebel. Large engagements soon broke out throughout
Sweden and Finland, and after years of unrest, in 1597, Duke Charles emerged victorious from
the Civil War. Seeing the situation, Sigismund decided to
personally intervene in this conflict. In the spring of 1598, he raised an army composed
mostly of mercenaries near Gdańsk and, together with his Swedish supporters, set out for Kingdom
of Sweden in the summer. After a few days of sailing, Sigismund and his fleet
reached Kalmar, which surrendered without a fight. King Sigismund initially held the advantage
and conquered several fortifications, including Sweden’s most important city, Stockholm. He then defeated his uncle Charles at the
Battle of Stegeborg, but negotiations began between the two soon after. Charles took advantage of this ceasefire to
gain the initiative. After being defeated at the Battle of Linköping,
Sigismund made a treaty with Charles and left the country, but did not relinquish the title
of King of Sweden. Duke Charles used this to regain the lost
cities and establish his rule, settling accounts with the supporters of King Sigismund. By the autumn of 1599, the entirety of Sweden
and Finland were under his control. During that time, the Swedish parliament officially
overthrew Sigismund and offered to proclaim his infant son Władysław as king on the
condition that he would be raised in Sweden, where he was to be brought up following the
Lutheran faith. As a devoted Catholic, Sigismund rejected
this proposal and thus the personal union between Poland and Sweden ceased to exist. Consequently, the conflict between Sigismund
and Charles continued. Sigismund began searching for allies throughout
Europe to support him in his conflict with his uncle. Diplomats were sent to Russia, where they tried
to form closer ties to the Russian Tsar Boris Godunov. Letters were further sent to the Pope, the
Habsburgs, and the Danes, but these diplomatic actions mostly ended without success. Although the Polish Sejm, the Parliament of
nobles that held significant power in the country, were disinterested in Sigismund's
attempt to remain on the Swedish throne, their view of the conflict changed drastically when Duke Charles
landed in Estonia with 14,000 troops in 1600. Charles quickly took control of a number of
cities that had previously been part of the Kingdom of Sweden but had supported Sigismund
in the civil war. In the fall of 1600, the Swedes launched an offensive
into Latvia, which was officially part of the Commonwealth. The Swedish army made significant gains, capturing
several cities, and breaking through to the Western Dvina River, directly threatening
Riga and besieging the city of Koknese. Consequently, the Polish Sejm realized that
Duke Charles was not only a threat to Sigismund in their fight for the Swedish crown, but also an enemy
of the entire Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. More money was quickly allocated to the army
and Lithuanian commander Jan Karol Chodkiewicz was withdrawn from Moldova and sent to the
northern front. The Poles counterattacked, recapturing lost
territories and defeating the Swedish army, forcing it to retreat North to Estonia. Following this, the war devolved into a series
of bloody sieges until the Battle of Weissenstein, after which the Swedes found themselves in
an increasingly difficult position. However, disagreements within the Polish Sejm
led to the neglection of the northern front, instead focusing on conflicts with the Hapsburgs
and Ottomans in Moldavia and exploiting the Russian Time of Troubles to the East. Meanwhile, Charles was preparing for an even
bloodier war. In 1604 he was proclaimed King of Sweden and high taxes
were introduced to finance the war with Poland. Russian Tsar Boris Godunov also financially
helped Sweden to draw the attention of the Poles and postpone the potential Commonwealth
invasion of Russia. With large sums of money, King Charles IX
raised a strong army and hired a large number of mercenaries from across Europe, landing in Estonia
and Latvia in the summer and autumn of 1605. The Swedish army was divided into three parts. The first landing took place near Reval, from
where the army headed south. The second landing was near Riga, and from there the Swedes
tried to surprise the enemy and quickly conquer the city. However, the impressive Lithuanian commander Jan Karol
Chodkiewicz managed to prevent the fall of Riga. Despite facing severe shortages of money,
resources and support from the Polish Sejm, Chodkiewicz persistently resisted the Swedish
army. He soon left a small part of his troops near
Riga to defend the city, heading north with the rest to intercept the Swedish army that
was advancing from Estonia. In September, King Charles IX himself landed
at Pärnu, where he united with another section of his army and also marched on Riga to conquer
the besieged city. Realizing that he was faced by a significantly
larger force, Chodkiewicz gave up the interception and retreated towards Kircholm, where he encamped. When the Swedish king reached Riga, learning
that the enemy army was nearby, he decided to use the opportunity his numerical superiority
gave him to destroy the Polish army. At dawn on September 27, the Polish-Lithuanian
commander received news that the Swedish army was nearby and marching towards his camp. The troops were awoken and took up their fighting
decisions. In the Swedish camp, King Charles IX deployed
his army into 4 lines. In the first row, under the command of Anders
Lennartsson, were 7 infantry regiments in square formations comprised of both pikemen
and musketeers, with overlapping arcs of fire. Between these regiments were large gaps that served for the
passage of cavalry through the line to harass the foe. In the second row was the cavalry, deployed
in 3 regiments of Finnish and 3 regiments of Swedish reiters under the command of Generals
Brandt and Mansfield. The third row was once again formed of infantry, deployed in 
6 regiments under the command of Frederick of Lüneburg. The fourth and final line contained 5 cavalry regiments
of reiters under the command of King Charles. In total, the Swedes had about 8,000 infantry
on the field, 2,500 cavalry and 11 cannons, primarily deployed in the first line. On the other hand, Chodkiewicz placed Lieutenant
Wincenty Woyn in the center with a detachment of hussars and with Polish haiduc infantry
on their flanks. The right wing was also formed of hussars
led by Jan Piotr Sapieha, while the left wing was the most numerous and was composed of
mixed cavalry units, among which were hussars but also light cavalry such as the Cossacks. The Polish Left was under the command of Tomasz
Dąbrowa, forming the traditional strong Left Wing of the so-called ‘Old Polish Order’
of battle. Behind this first line was a second and third,
containing more hussars, but also other cavalry units, such as the Cossacks, and reiters from Courland
who crossed the river just before the battle lend assistance. There was also a reserve force behind the
army, while a small detachment remained in the camp. Chodkiewicz had about 2,500 cavalry and about
1,000 infantry under his command, making the Swedish king numerically three times stronger
than the Poles. The two armies stood opposing one anther but
neither King Charles nor Hetman Chodkiewicz gave the command to attack. Both armies were in strong positions on two
separate hills, while a plain stretched between them. Although numerically superior, the Swedish
king did not want to abandon his positions and face the hussars, known for the strength
and ferocity of their charge, on open ground. Chodkiewicz also believed that charging uphill
against solid formations of pikemen and musketeers would be suicidal. However, after a lengthy wait, the Poles made
the opening move. The Polish light cavalry left their positions and rushed
towards the Swedish infantry, which held its ground. This was no mass cavalry charge, but only smaller
and faster detachments to harass the foe. Although fighting had broken out, the engagement
between the Polish light cavalry and the Swedish infantry was really a series of smaller skirmishes in which
the Poles tried to lure the Swedes into a general attack. These clashes were limited, and losses were
minimal on both sides, mainly due to the inaccuracy of contemporary firearms at such distances. After several hours of skirmishing, the Polish cavalry
gave up and headed back towards the main army. During that time, Hetman Chodkiewicz, realizing
that the Swedes did not intend to leave their positions, and knowing that he could not win
the battle simply by charging uphill against a more numerous opponent, ordered his entire
army to retreat to the east. Seeing the enemy leave the battle, King Charles
IX decided to follow him and use the opportunity to destroy as many Polish troops as possible. The first line of infantry, moved forward,
while the cavalry from the second line spread out onto the flanks and also began to advance. Descending onto the plain, the Swedes were
now headed uphill towards the retreating Poles. However, instead of abandoned positions and
spoils of war the Swedes saw a mass of Polish hussars and reiters rushing towards them. In addition to the charge of enemy’s cavalry,
strong infantry and artillery fire opened up, further adding to the disorder and panic
caused by the oncoming cavalry. It was at this moment that King Charles of
Sweden realized that the Polish withdrawal was in fact a feigned retreat, and that the
Poles had succeeded in luring the Swedes away from their favorable defensive positions. A strong Polish charge collided with the center
of the Swedish infantry and inflicted heavy casualties. Simultaneously, the Polish cavalry rushed towards
the horsemen on both flanks of the Swedish army. As Hetman Chodkiewicz concentrated the largest
number of his cavalry on his left wing, the Polish charge was most effective here. After a brutal clash that lasted mere minutes,
the entire Swedish right wing began to flee. The Swedish infantry, with the threat of having
their flank turned by the feared Polish hussars, also started a gradual retreat. Realizing the dire situation, King Charles
attempted to strengthen his front lines, bringing his cavalry reserve forwards. However, due to the great distance which had
opened, the second infantry line was now too far to join the battle, leaving the army divided
into two parts. Hence, King Charles could only send his cavalry
as reinforcements. During that time, the Swedish infantry continued
to retreat slowly while a fierce battle was being fought between the Swedish left and
the Polish right wing. The outcome hung in the balance, due to the disparity
in strength between the Polish left and right flanks. The Swedish cavalry reserve arrived and began
to turn the tide against the Poles. Having lost the initiative, and suffering
losses, the Polish right began a gradual withdrawal. In response, Chodkiewicz sent a section of
his reserve forces composed of hussars and light cavalry towards the endangered right
wing. This detachment was commanded by Teodor Lacki. Approaching the battlefield, Teodor Lacki
attacked the exposed left flank of the Swedish left wing, driving into their formation and
sowing panic. Within half an hour of fighting, the Swedish
left wing started to leave the field in panic, and seeing their escape, the rest of the Swedish cavalry
on the battlefield also started a disorganized retreat. Seeing this, King Charles IX himself abandoned
the battle, but soon lost his horse and escaped only because a Swedish handed the monarch
his own mount. However, the bloodiest part of the battle
was yet to follow. After the Swedish cavalry had withdrawn, the infantry force
was left exposed and divided into two detachments. Their bulky and slowly moving square formations
were unable to escape the Polish cavalry. Threatened from the flanks and rear, they
were subjected to numerous charges by the hussars, while between charges they were attacked
by hajduk infantry and cannons. Step by bloody step, their strength waned,
until the battle turned into a complete massacre. After the collapse of the last resistance, thousands
of Swedish soldiers lay dead on the battlefield. According to some sources, the total Swedish
losses amounted to up to 8,000 men, while the Poles had only 100 dead and 200 wounded. Given such light losses, the biggest blow
for the Poles was the loss of a large number of horses, decreasing the mobility and thus
the strength of their army. After the Battle of Kircholm, the Swedish army
abandoned the siege of Riga, fleeing back to Sweden. However, Hetman Chodkiewicz could not exploit
this magnificent victory since the troops were not given their pay, leading to discontent
amongst the ranks and an inability to purchase supplies or fodder for their horses. Although the news of Battle of Kircholm spread
throughout Europe, the money to finance the war from the Polish Sejm never arrived, leading
the campaign to grind to a halt. Despite the routing and destruction of much
of the Swedish army, the Poles were unable to regain their lost territories in Latvia. Due to the weakness of both sides, the war
in Latvia was without major clashes until 1608, when the Swedes once again raised an
army and went on the offensive. But Swedish army was again stopped by Hetman
Chodkiewicz. However, in 1611, the Swedes signed an armistice
with the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, as they were forced to turn to other battlefields…|||Gonna take my body down Right down, down, down to the river Gonna take my body down Let the water, carry me away Just float away Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh Bury all of my things Bury me in my skin All that I've done Oh lord, I'm done Who'd wanna be king Pulling too many strings? All that I've done Oh lord, I'm done Ohh, ohh Carry me away I float away Ohh, ohh Ohh In the river Gonna lay my head right down Right now, now, now and forever Gonna lay my head right down Let the water carry me away Just float away Bury all of my things Bury me in my skin All that I've done Oh lord, I'm done Who'd wanna be king Pulling too many strings? All that I've done Oh lord, I'm done Ohh, ohh Carry me away I float away Ohh, ohh Ohh In the river Ohh In the river Ohh In the river Ohh Ohh Bury all of my things Bury me in my skin All that I've done Oh lord, I'm done Who'd wanna be king Pulling too many strings? All that I've done Oh lord, I'm done Ohh, ohh Gonna take my body down Right down, down,  down to the river|||there are more and more indications that the winter of 223 224 will be one of the worst moments for Ukraine since the beginning of the epidemic. Russia, despite some successes and the operation aimed at breaking through the left bank of the Dnieper, the Ukrainian offensive is at an impasse and Russia seems to be preparing for a massive attack which may actually happen At any moment, President of Ukraine Volodymyr Zelensky warned against the possibility of an increase in Russian attacks on Ukraine's infrastructure this winter. In one of his last speeches, he emphasized that Ukraine must prepare for an increased number of drone or missile attacks on the country's infrastructure. Zelensky also thanked several countries, including Poland, for the support provided to Ukraine in strengthening its air defense. However, there are many indications that if this country finds itself against the proverbial wall, Poland will have to provide assistance, as usual, because we and Romania are the only ones who can save Ukraine from energy collapse. Poland and Romania are said to have already prepared high-voltage transformers which the Ukrainians will take when they need them, as written in The economist. According to the undp report, in April 2023, the electricity generation capacity in Ukraine decreased by 51 % compared to the period just before the Russian invasion in February 2022, although Ukraine boasts of improving its anti-missile shield with the help of, among others, Poland, the USA or other allied countries, the strike force that Russia is currently gathering in Crimea may shake the stability of the Ukrainian state, so Poland can expect further Ukrainian requests for help, and it is now receiving them as a partner Today's material is the Ley shops cashback platform, to use their services you need to go to the link in the description and then download the application or log in to the platform, for example using Facebook or Google, the whole process is very simple and will take only a few seconds Leti shops also has the option yes called hot cashback, for example, it is now available on Allegro hot cashback from your purchases will be five times larger than standard, so it's worth hurrying because it's a really good opportunity, you can save much more money, and no matter how you look at it, the holidays are coming now, so money for gifts They will definitely come in handy. Leti shops also thought about this by creating a lottery for you in which you can win as much as PLN 100,000. You have time to enter this lottery from November 20, 2023 to December 22, 2023 at 6:00 p.m. All you need to do is register in Leti Shop, accept the lottery regulations and make purchases in selected partner stores using their platform, for each purchase you receive lottery tickets, link to Leti Shop from their lottery and hot cashback on Allegro are in the description I think it's worth using, there will always be something left in your pocket Well, now it's time for today's material, I invite you energy from Polish power plants has been saving Ukraine from Blackout for a long time Our neighbor in mid-August was struggling with heat and record demand for electricity, so he bought energy from us on an unprecedented scale, as the Ukrainian network operator explained, this is the best option But the alternative is to turn off electricity to consumers before the Russian invasion. Ukraine was able to produce much more energy than it consumed. This allowed it to survive when part of the energy system was destroyed by the invaders. It also had transformers that had just been decommissioned and could be reconnected to the grid when the Russians destroyed them. the newer ones, nevertheless, between October 10 and the end of December last year, the average Ukrainian household did not have electricity for a total period of five weeks, hence Ukraine has now informed Poland that in the event of further infrastructure destruction it will need it. Once again, energy support from Poland, of course, Kiev has pay for this energy because, as you know, if there were deliveries for the glory of the homeland, many Poles would probably not be satisfied with this fact, especially since the relations between Poland and Ukraine have recently become significantly cooler, but the authorities of our eastern neighbors are as usual There have been requests for much more than that a dozen or so days ago, on November 2 , 2023, the President of Ukraine, Vlad Zelensky, appeared at the forum of the Supreme Council of Poland with an appeal for help in the reconstruction of Ukraine after the war, in his speech he said that Ukraine needs to rebuild everything that Russia has destroyed, we need Poland to rebuild our country to be able to live in peace and security, which is important Załęski He also emphasized that Poland is one of Ukraine's most important allies in the fight against Russia He thanked Poland for the help provided to Ukraine since the beginning of the war, including accepting over 2 and 5 million refugees from Ukraine at the same time Counting on our country's support in rebuilding the war damage, may we participate in this reconstruction, and hopefully this time not for nothing, it is disturbing that some in Europe are playing Solidarity in the political theater, turning the seed into a thriller. The words of the President of Ukraine spoken at the UN about the play of some countries in the Moscow theater and the cooling of mutual relations in August were completely unnecessary and many Poles he certainly holds it against him. Especially since in terms of military support for the defending Ukrainians, Poland is at the forefront and has often given more than it really could. The undisputed leader here is, of course, the United States, whose support has so far cost almost as much as In my opinion, this is what it is heading towards, and it is increasingly coming to the attention of both warring parties to Putin, and they both know that the Chinese and the Americans want to stop the escalation of military actions, to stop military operations, to reach a ceasefire, and most importantly, the vast majority of this equipment has already reached Ukraine, it includes Patriot systems, Abrams tanks and Haars long-range artillery systems. The Polish government does not conduct regular cyclical information activities. So there is no complete information about the deliveries, but what we have provided is worth over USD 4 billion, causing To this day, we are among the six countries that have provided the Ukrainians with the most military equipment, but this amount is greatly underestimated because they often gave us equipment whose value on the market differed significantly due to its age, so the amount of even $6 to $8 billion may not be at all be greatly exaggerated because not everything was included in the official data, let's first take into account tanks, among those delivered to Kiev the T72 dominates, well known to the Russians because of the Soviet design, Poland delivered the largest number of this type of vehicles and, according to unofficial data, at least 250 versions of this type were delivered to Ukraine t72m t72 M1 and t72 m1r When it comes to tanks, Poland has no equal, no one, not even the Americans, delivered as many of them as we did, the Polish authorities also sent 10 MiG 29s and declared the transfer of, among others, the S60 anti-aircraft guns along with 70,000 missiles intended for them, among others. equipment transferred from Poland to Ukraine also included various types of small arms, including grenade launchers, mortars and, among others, carbines, lightning bolts, Stinger launchers and many others. Also, the Polish defense industry plays a huge role in rearmament. Only last year, the Ukrainian side signed a contract with Huta Stalowa Wola , the manufacturer of guns, hit scrab, contract for the construction of 56 crabs, as noted by The economist, despite the delivery of such a huge amount of equipment during the 5 months of the counteroffensive, Ukraine managed to move the front line by only 17 km, and as the dependent general stated, currently the fighting is at a stalemate and without major supplies from the West in Therefore, Poland's continued counteroffensive and even defense may be much more difficult or simply impossible at the same time. Further tranches of support from Poland to Ukraine and the entire West are in doubt. Anyway, you remember perfectly well what Prime Minister Morawiecki said that Poland is now rearming . But back to the topic, the former chief Czesław Mroczek, vice-chairman of the parliamentary defense committee, who will most likely take power with his position, emphasized that decisions on how to further specifically help Ukraine in military matters require knowing the state of its own resources. Poland should act as part of the Ramstein group to support Ukraine in supplying it with military equipment and armament, we should make efforts to increase European Union spending under the European Peace Instrument are very serious measures thanks to which, among other things, we received a refund for the armament provided to Ukraine, Mroczek said in an interview for defence24.pl Therefore, it can be assumed that we will continue to send equipment to Ukrainians, but the opposition's declaration so far shows that these will no longer be such generous supplies because we have nothing left to give. In some time, we will certainly deliver another 30 Mig 29 and other prorad sieck equipment, but with and Solomon will not pour it out, and in the face of Russia's threats, we must also be ready for potential defense. It is also worth mentioning that we do not provide only weapons, but also humanitarian and infrastructural aid. The best proof of this is the fact that Rafał Trzaskowski announced at the beginning of November that Warsaw donated a total of 60 fully functional 81 series wagons that were withdrawn from everyday use with the arrival of new trains, older Warsaw metro trains are already carrying the inhabitants of Kiev, which the mayor of Warsaw shared on his Twitter or, if you prefer, on the x platform, even despite such gestures, considering As currently what bilateral relations look like, returning to the cooperation from the beginning of the conflict may turn out to be impossible, the proof of this is, of course, the Zbożów scandal and the submission of a complaint against Poland to the world trade organization on September 18 this year, the last hot dispute is also the blockade of the Polish-Ukrainian border by truck drivers this conflict turned out to be so crucial that the European Commission is even considering starting a criminal procedure against Poland. According to reports by rmffm journalists in Brussels, Polish drivers have been blocking three border crossings with Ukraine and adjacent roads for over a week, accusing the government of passivity and helplessness in the face of the losses suffered by Polish transport companies due to the need to compete with Ukrainian carriers after the outbreak of the war between Russia and Ukraine Poles are demanding a limit on the number of permits for Ukrainian trucks to enter the European Union, which is of course not agreed to Kiev police still won't let us go so that there won't be any short-circuit between drivers and Ukrainians sometimes come across sporadic cases where a boy's window was broken somewhere, he was just driving somewhere, not exactly. During the Polish-Ukrainian talks on November 13, it was not possible to reach an agreement on this matter, the Ukrainian delegation rejected Polish demands for restoring permits for commercial transport. Poland being one one of the most important transport companies in the European Union is incurring gigantic losses in making the market available to Ukrainian carriers, so far they performed about half of the transport on the Polish-Ukrainian border, currently they are responsible for over 90%, which generates gigantic losses, especially for the inhabitants of Podkarpacie due to the failure of these talks, Polish carriers announce that from November 20 they will begin a blockade of the medical terminal, which may last until January 3, this is a huge threat to interrupting the logistic chain of Ukraine, at the same time leading to significant economic destruction, which may be intensified by the upcoming winter, and the winter beyond our eastern border is already quite severe for the beginning November, the Russians will probably decide to use this moment to further weaken Ukraine. Especially since they have collected over 800 missiles in the annexed Crimea, it is highly probable that all these missiles will be used during the Energy Terror. Ukraine announced that 800 missiles, mainly of the I-caliber caliber, have already been concentrated on the occupied Peninsula. So nothing. It's no wonder that the Kiev authorities, knowing what may happen to them this winter, are trying to improve relations with Warsaw. Włodyki also expressed warm wishes to us on the occasion of Independence Day, informing at the same time how important Polish-Ukrainian cooperation is, especially when the ground is on fire, whether these wishes were sincere. It's hard to say . relations with our neighbors are based, as I said in previous films on the principle of give give give and the number of disputes is increasing An example of which is the current situation in connection with the carriers' protests, an understandable aspect is that the independence of Ukraine It is also important for Poland, but even more important for us Poles is the independence and independence of our homeland Please let us know in the comments what what do you think about curses because I'm curious about yours Thank you for today and until the next material Hold on and keep your fingers crossed for [Music] me and|||here we are at s g h es geha it's the warsaw school of economics this is where the ted talk is going to be it was funny actually when we were back there one of the students came up to us and was like hey i think i saw your video i think i saw your california video yeah so that just kind of like you know puts things into perspective just really the scale on on how quickly that video has made it out and how many people have seen it quite inspirational that you know these young people are seeing these videos it actually kind of actually even gives me more ideas on what other content to create to get more young people inspired to take up stem and science and engineering so yeah i'm super stoked [Music] today i'm going to be talking about building tech ecosystems but before i begin i just wanted to ask the audience just out of curiosity how many of you have ever visited the san francisco bay area or silicon valley as one may call okay so we've got a couple of people in the audience it's a pretty amazing place isn't it some of you may recognize this picture this is university of downtown palo alto but it's also kind of startling to think that this is what palo alto looked like less than 100 years ago and so the question is why why is it that all of the big tech companies decided to set up shop in this obscure place in central california what were the key elements that made the santa clara valley the silicon valley well let's talk about a little bit of history first this is stanford university leland stanford founded stanford university in 1885. he was a railroad baron then in 1909 david starr jordan he was the president at stanford at the time invested in the audient tube he invested 500 into this piece of technology 16 000 u.s in today's money and this was considered one of the very first high-tech investments arguably one of the first venture capital investments ever made and this spawned a culture of entrepreneurship several decades later william shockley invented the silicon transistor he won the nobel prize for this dr william shockley is one of three americans sharing the physics award for research which produced the transistor and in 1956 he left bell labs in new jersey and went to mountain view california where he started shockley semiconductor laboratories he brought his entire team with him but unfortunately his paranoid and neurotic management style drove his team out in 1957. these eight gentlemen became known as the traitorous eight they started fairchild semiconductor in 1957 and about a month after opening their doors the ussr launched sputnik and the space race was on in 1961 john f kennedy announced that the u.s was going to put a man on the moon i believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal before this decade is out of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to the earth and in order to do so they had to figure out how to take an astronomical amount of computing power and squeeze it into this tiny little box aboard the lunar module luckily for nasa robert noyce just a couple years earlier invented the planar integrated circuit made from silicon and this is quite literally what blasted the entire silicon valley into the moon at a fairchild semiconductor many employees and founders left to found companies such as intel sandisk and amd and the venture capital fund sequoia and kleiner perkins also came out of fairchild semiconductor all of a sudden we have ourselves a budding ecosystem in addition to that the total population of those who live in silicon valley is just under 40 percent so almost half whereas the national average for the united states is less than 15 so returning back to my previous question what are those elements that you need to start an ecosystem well you need this culture of entrepreneurship you need a high density of highly skilled workers you need a lot of public capital to catalyze the reaction you need a lot of investments into high-tech areas and finally immigration now to really drive my point home here i want to talk about israel so here's a country that's basically an island except being surrounded by water you're surrounded by a bunch of countries that are trying to wipe you off the face of the earth so the israelis had to get creative with how they were going to defend themselves they also had to think fast and act like a startup so when the israelis organized their military they organized it such that it had a horizontal structure and not a vertical structure like almost every other military in the entire world what this did was fostered a culture of entrepreneurship so much so that today for every 1844 citizens in israel there's one startup so we have our culture of entrepreneurship next up for every 10 000 employees there are in israel there's roughly 140 scientists and 135 engineers the most out of any developed society in the entire world so we have our high density of highly skilled workers next up in 1993 israel launched something called the asma group yasma which stands for initiative yazma was responsible for funding its first generation of venture capitalists in the country they provided 40 percent of the total capitalization of a fund and this was in the form of a refundable grant so the investors realized a lot of leverage now this chart i want you to just take a mental note of this chart we're going to use it later but beginning in 1993 yazma started deploying funds to its vc ecosystem and as you can see it went up and to the right and it sustained itself even after the dot-com bust so we have our public capital to catalyze a reaction next up in 1974 intel was looking to create its second headquarters and it decided to pick israel it was instrumental in developing its generation of mobility chips these mobility chips to this day make up half of intel's revenue intel has since invested 10 billion dollars in the country actually more than 10 billion dollars since 1974. then in 1998 cisco decided to build its second headquarters in israel it was responsible for the development of the crs-1 web router this is a very high piece of technology that lives in many data centers and cisco has since invested two billion dollars since 1998 and so we have our large investments into high-tech areas finally in 1990 after the fall of the soviet union roughly 800 000 jews emigrated from the soviet union or the former soviet union back to israel one in three of these individuals had some sort of formal technical training they're either a scientist or an engineer so we have our immigration story but on the other hand we have a place like dubai so dubai arguably has a phenomenal culture of entrepreneurship it has one of the highest immigration rates out of any developed country in the entire world and there's lots of public capital flowing into its ecosystem but it's missing two very important things it's missing a high density of highly skilled workers and because of that companies aren't creating centers of innovation in dubai sure large tech companies have presences in dubai but these are service centers these aren't centers of innovation so if you don't have all five of these elements that doesn't necessarily mean that you're going to have a tech ecosystem so this is very important so the question is is what about poland what's the story here well ironically poland's culture of entrepreneurship stems from the many decades behind the iron curtain because of a centrally planned economy and state enterprises this created economies of shortages in the country long lines like this were not uncommon in those days and i'm sure many of you sitting in this audience have stories from parents or grandparents or other family members about these days here's an article from the new york times 1975 black markets bloom in eastern europe behind facade of straight-laced marxism if you had an old pair of blue jeans and if you're in warsaw you can get up to 70 for that old pair of blue jeans that just gives you an idea of this black market it's estimated that anywhere between 20 to 30 billion dollars annually was the size of the polish black market during that time so we have our culture of entrepreneurship next up we're going to talk about the highly skilled workers here in the country and what better place to start than looking at stem graduates so this is a period between 2013 and 2019 so a seven year period poland produced 761 000 stem graduates in that period so number four in europe even though it's number six in terms of population so this high number isn't simply a function of the population of the country but rather it's a function of the stem graduates per capita now poland is number nine overall in that seven year period in terms of stem graduates per capita but if we want to go beyond the united kingdom we only need to increase this figure by roughly 12 or 14 000 students per year so very very tight race here at the top now the next couple of charts that i want to show you are one of poland's superpowers and that's its women poland is also number four in terms of total stem graduates total female stem graduates at 324 000 but look at this it's number one on a per capita basis and what's even more striking is if we look at the female to male ratio for stem graduates poland's at 43 it's almost half compare this to norway or finland which are 28 and 27 so we have not only our high density of highly skilled workers but we get brownie points for great gender diversity next up we're going to talk a little bit about the public funding situation in poland so there's two vehicles that provide funding to both startups and vcs we have the national center for research and development and pfr specifically pfr ventures pfr is the yazma of poland ncbr since 2016 will have deployed four and a half billion dollars through its fast track and bridge alpha program and pfr will have deployed 750 million dollars if we're going to compare this with yazma that deployed 250 million dollars back in the early 90s pfr alone will have deployed three times as much capital but if we combine this with ncbr it will have been 20 times more capital remember this chart let's zoom in on vc backed startups 1993 was the inflection point here's poland there's our inflection point so poland today is where israel was in 1995. so we have our public capital to catalyze a reaction i'm sure all of you may have heard google just recently announced a massive cloud development center here in the center of warsaw at least 14 floors and is deploying roughly two billion dollars into this project and they're probably doing this because microsoft just a year earlier announced that it was investing a billion dollars also into its azure cloud platform here in poland and finally poland is fighting for an 80 billion dollar prize from intel and this is also in addition to the 3 300 employees that are in gdisk in the north of the country so we have our large investments into high-tech areas finally back in 2014-2015 with the political situation in ukraine roughly two to three million ukrainians emigrated to poland in a five-year span this is one of the largest migrations in the history of europe and also since 2000 as the economic situation is continuing to improve in poland more and more people want to move to poland for economic opportunity so we have our immigration picture but now there's one last thing that i want to bring up that i haven't mentioned at all wasn't part of the five vectors and it's poland's other secret superpower that it has that no other country has in the entire world and that's its diaspora in the 20th century many polls left poland because of the war and because of communism because of that poland has one of if not the largest and most dispersed diaspora in the entire world to put it in the context there's roughly 10 million people of direct polish descent living in the united states and 6 million living in europe that's 42 percent of today's population imagine if we were to repatriate 1.6 million of these individuals back to poland that's four percent of the population [Music] these people would bring back soft skills that would complement a highly skilled workforce here in poland so i go back to my original question does poland have enough of these vectors to sustain and to build a big tech ecosystem i think it does but not only that [Music] i also think poland has an opportunity to not just become any old tech ecosystem but one of the largest tech ecosystems in the world and that's given the fact that we have the largest diaspora in the entire world when the 800 000 jews left the soviet union back in the early 90s and came to israel that was the spark that initiated the israeli tech ecosystem imagine if the same happened for poland so if you're out there right now and you're listening and either you your parents or your grandparents left poland many years ago i want you to consider this as an invitation an invitation to come back an invitation to utilize your skills and apply them to a highly skilled workforce here in poland an invitation to come back and build the largest tech ecosystem the world has ever seen thank you very much [Applause] you|||- The transcript you’re about to hear, like every single police statement presented in this video, has never been released to the public before. Making this the first and only documentary about the true crime case of Lori Poland, most commonly known as “The Girl in the Hole.” - Brenda, it’s really important that you’re sure. - Kidnapped, abused, and left for dead. 3-year-old Lori Poland was taken in broad daylight. With no evidence in sight, the police had to turn to the neighborhood children and their parents to gather any information that could lead to the capture of the kidnapper and bring Lori back home. - Just bring her back and not hurt her, please. - Trapped 10 feet underground, the little girl was left to fend for herself. But her resilience defied any and all expectations, proving that even at such a young age, she was already a true survivor. - In the small town of Sheridan, Colorado, a tight-knit community where everyone knows each other, 3-year-old Lori Poland was playing in her parents’ front yard with her 5-year-old brother. It was a sunny day right around noon, and many people were out and about enjoying the weather. Her father took the day off to paint their house, but it was very hot outside and the children asked him if they could have a popsicle. There were lots of neighbors around and Lori was with her brother. So Richard Poland, her father, left them alone for a minute to go get them some. Inside, he could still see them through the window until he turned his back and reached for the fridge. - Seconds later, my dad came back outside, just a moment later. He looked at the curb, he looked at my brother, he looked at the curb again. My pants were on the sidewalk. - Richard, frantic about the situation, started to look around his property and went to his neighbors for help. Some reported a car stopping briefly in front of the house but leaving just as quickly, and nobody noticed anything suspicious about Lori’s whereabouts. Distraught, Richard didn’t waste any more time and called the police. - The search for Lori became an immediate concern for the entire community. The police started a massive manhunt, going door to door in the neighborhood, interviewing anyone who had seen something. Word of the missing girl quickly spread and the town came together to help in the search efforts. Flyers were posted all over town and volunteers joined the search parties scouring the nearby woods. The family was devastated, and Diane Poland, Lori’s mother, made an emotional plea to the kidnapper begging for the safe return of her daughter. - A desperate plea from the mother of Lori Poland. - Just bring her back. - It was the prototypal abduction, before Stranger Danger. Before Amber alerts, before social media, there was almost no prevention being done by the government in regard to kidnapping and child abuse in 1983. - So in 1983, it was more of a crime to cause harm to an animal than it was to a child. So you had a larger sentence if you hurt an animal or killed an animal than if you did it to a small child. - This is how it all happened from Lori’s perspective. The kidnapper parked in front of the house in a hurry and opened his passenger door. The man offered her some candy, and she, being only three years old, was easily lured by the treat. - When he pulls up, he asks if I like candy, and like any sugar-loving 3-year-old, I’m like, “Dude, yeah.” - He forced her to take her pants off, snatched her, and was gone in a moment’s notice. The kidnapper was well aware of the danger he had placed himself in by committing such a brazen crime in a well-populated area. - In the middle of the summer, it was middle of the day, just a really bold move. - He knew that he had to put as much distance as possible between himself and the town in order to evade the police. This led him to drive recklessly, careening down mountain roads and twisting through the forested countryside. - He took me to the mountains in Colorado about 20 miles west of Denver, and then he took me up to Chief Hosa exit up by 70. - Finally, he arrived at an old abandoned outhouse set back deep into the woods. She didn’t know it yet, but this was to be Lori’s prison for the foreseeable future, but not before the kidnapper had his way with her. - He proceeded to severely abuse me and do a lot of pretty horrific things to me like... - Out of respect for Lori, who was only a toddler at the time, we won’t cover any more of the assault as it is extremely graphic. When he was done, her kidnapper lifted her up and with a cruel and heartless gesture, dropped her down the outhouse’s 10-foot-deep toilet right into the latrine pit. There was no way for her to see, but she could feel something was wrong with her foot after crashing down at the bottom. There, she was trapped in the dark, surrounded by filth and chemical-laced ice-cold water. The sound of the door slamming shut echoed in her mind as she started to cry in fear and pain. She had just been left to die underground. - Lori was taken while she was playing outside her home. - Without reliance on Amber alerts or the internet, the parents turned to mainstream media to try and locate their daughter. On the first day of her disappearance, both Diane and Richard appeared on TV. They shared their story, expressing their concerns, and pleading for anyone with information to come forward. Luckily, many neighbors contacted the police. One eyewitness, Paul Weaver, was particularly observant, recalling crucial details about the car involved in Lori’s kidnapping. - On the same day, another witness, Michael R. Fisher, also came forward with important information. His children reportedly had a concerning encounter with a suspicious man a week prior. - With a description of the car and details regarding the kidnapper’s physical appearance, the police were in a good position to find the culprit. There was still hope the little girl was alive, but on that matter, they had nothing. Absolutely zero information regarding her location nor anything that could lead them there. - What happened on August 22, 1983 completely stopped the entire community of Colorado. - Down the hole, Lori somehow knew there was something wrong with the water. In total darkness, she could only rely on her sense of touch and smell to tell apart her surroundings. But these two were enough for her to understand that she should stay as far away as she could from the sludge. There was some sort of mound of wood and rubble over the murky water, so she stuck to it, flattening it with her arms, turning it into a kind of seat. It is at this moment that Lori recalled a memory of her mom for a second. - And I had just turned three and I had just gotten potty trained and I had to go to the bathroom, and I was so worried that I was gonna let my mom down. - Lori’s worries may seem trivial now, but what she didn’t know was that right above her head, years of untreated methane gas and hydrogen sulfide had accumulated in the upper layer of the pit. If she were to stand up even for a minute, she would probably pass out, fall down the mound, and drown in the water. And the same was true for the underlying sludge. She would risk severe infection if her wounded legs came into contact with it. But even if the little girl knew better, the mound was very small and there was no way she could fit her entire body onto it. And so Lori let her legs hang with her toes sometimes coming into contact with the surface of the water. - And he left me there. And he left me there to starve to death. He left me there for dead. - The following day, the police still had nothing concerning Lori, but were closing in on the culprit’s identity. Investigators coming directly from the FBI joined the local police and started going door to door all around Denver in hopes of finding more information about the mysterious missing letters on the kidnapper’s license plate. And against all odds, they struck gold when they bumped into Wuanita Zappa, a grandmother living in an adjacent town. - And right there, they had a match. After running the plate, they associated it with Robert Paul Thiret, a local golf club groundskeeper with no criminal record. They tried to get to him, but the man wasn’t home at the time and the police had no time to waste. So they went for the closest relative they could get their hands on, his mother. - The police didn’t let that statement linger. Instead, they went directly to the facts. Robert and his car had been identified in three separate incidents, and in all of them, he offered children candies and asked them to take their pants off, including Lori Poland. These words resonated loudly in the room before Betty Ann continued her statement. - An unknown amount of time later, Lori’s young mind was starting to fail her. She couldn’t discern night from day as minutes lasted like hours, while the pain from her now heavily infected legs kept her awake at all times. - The chemicals that were in this toilet made it up into my pelvis. My legs were completely black all the way up to my upper thigh. - But as much as the underground seemed depressive to her, it was also her salvation. The biting cold of the latrine was nothing compared to the nighttime temperatures in the Colorado mountains. If she had been left in the forest, she wouldn’t have lasted more than a night naked in the cold, but down the pit, she managed to survive four days straight without food or water. - I was starving to death. That’s torture. - She couldn’t see them, but her legs were almost black with infection, and her time was running out. With only a few hours left to live, Lori tried to reminisce about her mother, but her memory was blurry at best. How long had she been down there? Days, weeks, months. And suddenly, one clear memory came back. She remembered her mother’s face congratulating her for something  she did only a few days back. But the recollection slipped from her mind almost as fast as it came in. Now all she could hear was the echo of her own cries amplified by her buzzing fever and nothing else. Not even the door slamming up top nor the scream of the disturbed couple who happened to find her down at the bottom of the pit. - I was crying, crying for my mom. And bird watchers happened to be driving by. - Cynthia and Steven Gaulin, a couple of bird watchers, were heading out to the mountain for a hike. On their way, Cynthia said she needed to go to the bathroom so her husband turned towards the Beaver Hook trail head, remembering the old camper amenities there. As she walked in, Cynthia heard an unexpected sound. It’s hard to imagine the horror she must have felt when she heard the desperate cries of a little girl coming down from the latrine. Cynthia looked down the hole only to see the reflection of the dim light in the tearful eyes of the child. - And so eventually, they looked down and they said, “What are you doing here?” And I told them that I lived there. And so for me, it was my new normal, I literally thought I lived in the bottom of a toilet. - Steven Baker, a volunteer firefighter, was called to the scene. Once he reached the bottom, he was able to locate the girl and checked her condition. Despite being trapped in the pit for several days without food or water, Lori was still conscious, but her legs were in very bad shape. Steven gently lifted her out of the mound and secured her onto his harness. When they reached the top, Lori was immediately sent to the hospital. Diane, Lori’s overjoyed mother, followed right behind. Once there, the situation was dire, as her mental state went from bad to worse. She was stuck in a disassociative state, suffered insomnia induced waking nightmares, and she was absolutely terrorized by everyone, even her own parents. - Capturing the terror and relief only her parents could feel. - But their reunion was cut short as doctors were faced with a difficult decision. - Her heart, lungs, and brain were failing. Her fingers, feet, and toes were turning black. - The infection was rapidly spreading, and amputation seemed to be the only option to save Lori’s life. But over the course of only a few days, the child’s condition improved dramatically. And miraculously, she was able to keep both of her legs. When she was better, Lori was finally reunited with her parents for good. Tears streamed down Diane’s face. It had been four long, agonizing days since her daughter had been taken from her, but against all odds, they were finally together. - But sadly, their ordeal was far from being over. After the police finally got their hands on Robert Paul Thiret, they turned to young Lori for information. She was asked to make a detailed statement on events her mind had already began to repress. - Dr. Richard Krugman was Lori’s pediatrician at the time at the Kemp Center and shot video of this interview. - As you can probably guess, this was not only traumatic, but also very demanding for such a young child. Then Lori was tasked with identifying her attacker from a row of people. - She was rock solid in her identification. Her body language said, “Mommy, that’s him.” And she sort of reeled back. She was a little scared. - Closing in on the trial, Robert’s wife provided him with a forged alibi. This led the prosecution to believe that Robert might get away with it if he chose to stick with his non-guilty defense. This forced the judge to take a controversial decision. He offered Robert a diminishing plea deal. - He was then sentenced to 10 years in prison. - Instead of being charged with kidnapping, attempted murder, and sexual abuse, all charges were dropped except sexual abuse. This reduced his sentence from 48 years to only 10 years. - And so he was sentenced to 10 years in prison and was released after six for good behavior. - The public was outraged by the reduced sentence. Since the impact of these events on Lori’s life had been long-lasting and profound, she experienced a range of psychological and emotional problems such as depression, anxiety, and PTSD. She also struggled with trust issues and self-esteem problems as she grew up, but proper support and care, like counseling and therapy, helped her cope with the trauma and heal from the abuse in the long run. And now that she’s an adult, Lori sees it from a completely different perspective. - Do you feel like justice was served? - For me, it’s not really about justice. It’s more about being impactful. And every day, I wake up and I just try and be impactful and try and be good in the world and prevent people from growing up and causing harm. - Justice does not help with PTSD. Justice doesn’t stop the nightmares. Justice doesn’t actually help the sufferer. And so I think for Lori and her story, her desire to understand the perpetrator, that actually relieves some of the pain. That allows her to develop context that she did not have at three years old and could not have had. So understanding becomes crucial for her to be free from the silent suffering that nobody else will ever see or know. Justice is for the witnesses more than it is for the victim. - To this day, the ripple effects of what happened continue. But Lori Poland, now a mother of three, has never backed away from a fight, not only for herself, but now for all children who have been abused. - Today, she operates her own therapy practice and works alongside pediatrician, Dr. Richard Krugman, who helped her through her own trauma decades ago as the co-founder of the End Child Abuse and Neglect Association, or ENDCAN. Lori’s work with the association has shown her that abuse is often part of a cycle of violence, with victims on both sides, as most sex offenders have a history of being abused in their own childhood. Robert Paul Thiret’s past demonstrates this, as he was abused as a child, starting at age three, the same age Lori was when he kidnapped her. - Imagine, I’ve sat in a room with 250 sex offenders who’ve shared for the first time in their lives their own lived experience of being harmed, and how that created this anger inside of them to then amplify them causing harm. Again, not to excuse it, not to justify it, but to understand it. - Instead of seeking punishment and justice, Lori’s mission is to promote healing and understanding, recognizing that every person involved in abuse needs support and care to heal and move forward. Her story is truly a beacon of hope, inspiring others to turn their suffering into strength and to use their experiences to make a positive impact on the world. She wants all victims of abuse and neglect to know that their voices will always be louder than silence. - I’ve never met a human, no matter how atrocious their crime, that their primary need is not to matter. It’s up to us to do the right thing. If we, instead of getting angry, had some semblance of understanding, not excusing, but understanding that those people matter, imagine the changes. If we ensured that every human felt like they mattered.|||These latest strikes come amid a dramatic downward spiral in relations between Ukraine and one of its biggest supporters, NATO, Poland. What began as a dispute over Ukrainian grain imports has quickly escalated in recent days, with Poland's prime minister announcing late Wednesday an end to supplying weapons to Ukraine and a focus instead on arming its own defense forces. Poland and four other neighboring countries issued a ban on Ukrainian grain imports after farmers complained of a slump in prices caused by the increased grain supply. France has sided with Ukraine and called the move unjustified. And the European Council president, Charles Michel says EU support, though, for Ukraine remains steadfast. The EU intends to support Ukraine for its logistics. Ukraine's crime scene and there is a criminal and it's extremely important to make sure that there would be no impunity There also appears to be signs of growing divisions in the US Congress over continued backing of Ukraine, with opinion polls showing a lack of support for Ukraine among Americans. A growing number of Republican lawmakers are threatening to end funding, a position supported by most Republican presidential hopefuls. The US president, though, has promised Ukrainians they won't face Russia alone and has called for global unity to end the war. And that commitment will be on display Thursday at the White House with an announcement of another round of military assistance during a visit by the Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky. For all his scenes, Kayla Telsey When Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelensky visits the White House, the U.S. is prepared to unveil a new security package, including artillery anti-armor antimissile and significant air defense capabilities that officials say will help the country ramp up its counter offensive, as well as protect its skies with an expectation that strikes on critical infrastructure will increase. As the weather grows colder. But a U.S. official tells me that deep strike missiles known as attack arms are not expected in this new security drawdown. John Kirby, a top national security official, told reporters that government agencies are still weighing the possibility of sending these weapons to Ukraine. The military in the U.S., however, believes that they're less critical for a successful counter offensive than, say, vehicles and mine clearing equipment that can breach Russian troops on the ground. But it all comes as Zelensky prepares his pitch for skeptics in the US Congress who are weighing whether to greenlight tens of billions of dollars in more aid. Zelensky tells CNN that his pitch to them will be We are near the finish line. I am sure of it. Kayla tells CNN, traveling with the president in New York Barbara Walter is a permanent member of the Council on Foreign Relations, professor of international relations at the University of California, San Diego, and a world renowned expert on how conflicts begin and how they also end. And it's been a while. It's good to see you. It's great to be here. Thank you. Okay. So one way this war could also end is by division and that division within NATO. And that brings us to this decision by Poland to end supplying weapons to Ukraine. This comes amid a dispute over Ukrainian grain farmers in Poland are blaming the imports for a slump in prices. So how significant is this rift right now between Kiev and Warsaw, not just in the impact on the battlefield which seems minimal, but the overall bigger impact of what appears to be some very serious cracks? I think this is actually just a temporary rift and it's temporary because I think it's purely political. Poland has an election next month. Currently, there is a right wing party in power a populist party. The farmers are very important for that party to stay in power and to win the elections next month. And populist voters also tend to be kind of the first voters, Poland first or America first. And so it's a smart political move on some levels for the prime minister to pull back in this month before the elections, to say that we're going to take care of Poland's defense first. To say that we're not going to buy Ukrainian grain, instead we're going to buy we're going to continue to buy Polish green and make the farmers happy. So I think this is a political move that's not going to have long standing consequences. Okay. Well, the French foreign minister, for one, says that this decision by Poland was unjustified citing an EU study which found that Ukrainian grain did not distort local prices. His Katerina Colada. Listen to this. In. There is no market upheaval and there are perhaps internal political considerations on the part of some of our partners, which unfortunately pushes them to have this position that nothing justifies it. So the opinion there from the French foreign minister was essentially that, you know, this is sort of internal politics in Poland coming out to play. But there are other European countries siding with Poland over this issue. But then this also brings us to a division within the United States. And while the White House plans to provide Ukraine with new aid during Zelensky's visit on Thursday, there's a good number of Republicans balking at continued support for Ukraine and divisions among European nations growing divisions in the US Congress. It may not be the start of the crack, but it's just heading in the direction that Putin has been hoping for Of course, every every day, every month that the West doesn't continue to support Ukraine either by buying grain or sending additional resources and and munitions is going to hurt Ukraine. And Ukraine needs all the help that it can get. What's happening here in the United States is in some ways similar to what's happening in Poland. Americans are divided based on party. 71% of Republicans do not support continuing to say to send aid to Ukraine. About 62% of Democrats want to continue to to support Ukraine. So there's very much a divide. And again, the divide is the result of of what different people think about how the US should be spending its money. Republicans increasingly think we should be spending on the United States America first. Why should we be sending our money to a country that's that's far away? Whereas Democrats believe that supporting Ukraine and defeating Russian aggression is important not only for US security, but for the security of our allies and the world as well. And in part one of the reasons this war has dragged on for so long is because Russia has used its veto to block any attempt at the UN Security Council to intervene. So with that in mind, here's the US Secretary of State, Antony Blinken. For over a year and a half. Russia has shredded the major tenets of the United Nations Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, International Humanitarian Law, and flouted one Security Council resolution after another. It's hard to imagine a country demonstrating more contempt for the United Nations in all that it stands for this from a country with a permanent seat on this council. And just moments ago, we also heard from the Ukrainian president saying that, you know, this war cannot end while Russia has that veto power on the Security Council. Is he right? Well, the war can end in lots of different ways. The war could end by Russia being defeated, Ukraine being defeated, or both sides agreeing to some sort of negotiated settlement. The U.N. is not going to really have very much influence in how this war ends in large part because Russia is not going to agree to any new and action that's going to hurt Russia in any way. And that's just not going to change People like to think about the United Nations as having independent power. They like to think of it as an organization that can can act in the in the best interest of all countries in the world and certainly can act against an aggressor and a country that's committing war crimes. But the reality is, is the U.N. is just an organization made up of member countries. And most of the power is in the hands of five countries. And one of those countries is Russia. And Russia is not going to give up that power. And the U.N. is not going to change the system because it benefits those five countries.|||Na południu Polski, poza miejscem, gdzie równiny
zamieniają się w pagórki, a pagórki w góry, znajduje się urocze miasteczko o nazwie Nowy Targ. Witam w Nowym Targu - stolicy Podhala, otoczonej górami, gorącymi źródłami i niebem. To wspaniałe miejsce na
rozpoczęcie górskiej przygody. Wizyta tutaj jest dla mnie
osobiście interesująca, ponieważ moja prababcia
była z Nowego Targu. Jest to również pierwsze miejsce, w którym przebywałem
w Polsce w 2000 roku. Dla wielu Amerykanów genealogia
to wielki podbój i często jedyny powód, dla którego przyjeżdżają do
Polski w pierwszej kolejności. Takich opowieści jest bez liku. Spotkałem się więc z ekspertem, aby dowiedzieć się więcej o procesie odkrywania swoich korzeni. Genealogia jest bardzo ważna, ponieważ pomaga nam uhonorować naszych przodków, zachować pamięć o nich. Na naszych warsztatach zawsze powtarzamy, że gdyby nie oni, nie byłoby nas tutaj. Czy możesz mi podać najważniejsze kroki, które należy podjąć, jeśli chcemy odkryć historię swojej rodziny lub genealogię? Przede wszystkim musimy sprawdzić: co mamy w domu, bo każdy
ma swoje rodzinne archiwum, związane zwłaszcza z imionami,
nazwiskami, nazwiskami panieńskimi, informacjami o datach, a gdy już zbierzesz wszystkie te informacje, możesz skorzystać baz danych online. Potem musisz skupić się na
znalezieniu swojej rodzinnej parafii, do której należała wieś twoich
przodków, w której tam mieszkali. Czy uważasz, że dzieci polskich imigrantów, które przedostały się do Stanów Zjednoczonych, są w rzeczywistości Polakami? Jestem pewiena, że nasze pochodzenie nie jest związane tylko z naszymi rodzicami czy dziadkami, udowodnili to naukowcy, historia,
wszystko, co widzimy. Każdy człowiek jest związany
z jakąś określoną kulturą, regionem świata. Wierzę, że każdy, kto wyemigrował z Polski, ale ma swoje korzenie tutaj, może zdecydowanie uważać się za Polaka, ponieważ to dziedzictwo wiąże
się z naprawdę długą historią. A jako pierwszy przystanek podczas wizyty - polecam muzeum regionalne, które jest solidnym fundamentem
do zrozumienia lokalnej historii. Tego typu wystawa jest bezcenna, ponieważ pozwala z pierwszej ręki zobaczyć, jak żyli tu ludzie na przestrzeni wieków. Na przykład na początku XIX wieku była jedna bardzo odmienna praktyka, która była obserwowana podczas posiłków. Był to fakt, że rodzina dzieliła się
jedzeniem z jednej gigantycznej miski. To było jakby prezentowane na stole, a jedzenie było dalej rozdzielane. Jej przykład jest za mną. Wzrusza mnie to, że jest on inkrustowany sztuką ludową, za którą kochamy ten region, a przecież był to element
zwykłego rodzinnego domu. Kolejnym nieoczekiwanym rzemiosłem, które funkcjonowało w Nowym Targu, było tworzenie kapeluszy.
Proces był prosty, ale wymagał pewnego kunsztu. Producent czapek zaczynał od założenia kapelusza na tę większą
formę w kształcie piłki nożnej i stopniowo zwijając go w kształt, który pasowałby do ludzkiej głowy. Tworzono tu specyficzne kapelusze
dla różnych grup społecznych, od chłopów do wyższych sfer, a nawet
żydowskich mieszkańców Nowego Targu. Setki lat temu był to ważny szlak handlowy - stąd nazwa Nowy Targ - w języku angielskim New Market. Transportowano tu produkty
od soli po węgiel, czy wino. I jak widać po tej wymyślnej grafice z boku, kupcy nie tylko prowadzili
interesy, ale także ozdabiali. Nowy Targ jako serce Podhala oferuje wiele ciekawych dróg do przemierzenia - jedna z nich doprowadziła mnie do
niezapomnianego zabytku z listy UNESCO. Spędziłem trochę czasu rozmawiając
z lokalnymi mieszkańcami i stwierdziłem, że mamy dużą
różnicę patrząc na ten pomnik. Dla mnie to skarb dla ludzkości, dla nich to wyjątkowa, ale nieco zwyczajna przestrzeń, w której na co dzień się spotykają.
Łączy ich jako społeczność. Służy jednak jednemu wyższemu celowi: niedaleko stąd jest sztuczne jezioro, a ta pani, z którą rozmawiałem, kiedyś mieszkała w wiosce, która istniała,
w miejscu dzisiejszego jeziora. Plany dotyczące tego jeziora rozciągnęły się na tę wioskę. Jednak wioska została uratowana dzięki temu
niesamowitemu, historycznemu artefaktowi. Więc to jest powód, dla którego się tu przeprowadzili,
ale jest to również powód, dla którego istniała wioska,
do której można się było przenieść. Szyny kolejowe historycznie stanowiły istotne połączenie z tym obszarem, a jeśli przyjeżdżasz, aby studiować historię rodziny - warto zauważyć, że ta forma transportu służyła jako dosłowny element drogi, którą przebywali przodkowie i matki w drodze do nowego świata. Do Nowego Targu nadal można dojechać pociągiem. Można też oglądać te relikty przeszłości w ciszy. To muzeum ma szeroką gamę wystaw, od lokomotyw parowych po dieslowe, elektryczne, pługi i dźwigi. Wydaje się, że ma coś, co zainteresowałoby wszystkich. Muszę przyznać, że poza ciekawą historią, której można się tutaj nauczyć, Nowy Targ oferuje mi też coś, co uważam za bezcenne jako podróżnik, patrzący na Europę oczami Amerykanina. I to jest doświadczenie jak w Disneylandzie. Mam na myśli w najbardziej pochlebnym sensie. Widzicie obrazy, które znamy o Europie, pochodzą z mediów, z książek historycznych, często przedstawiających podróże
w czasach romansu lub wojny, pojazdami, które mnie tu otaczają. Dziś stoją nadal i naprawdę łączą Cię z wyobrażeniem Europy, którą miałeś nadzieję znaleźć. Zbudowane na miejscu dawnej parowozowni w Chabówce, muzeum słynie z licznych i ciekawych wystaw związanych z historią kolejnictwa w Polsce. Na koniec należy odnieść się do faktu, że Nowy Targ to miasto położone w centrum jednych z najlepszych
rekreacji na świecie. Chciałbym zaoferować jedno z takich miejsc niedaleko miasta - o nazwie Szaflary - bardzo przeoczany klejnot. Pod koniec lat 90. i na początku XXI wieku Polacy zwykle podróżowali na Słowację, aby korzystać z termalnych basenów mineralnych. Wszystko zmieniło się w 2008 roku, kiedy do gry weszły Szaflary - miasteczko oddalone o rzut
kamieniem od Nowego Targu, gdzie założono pierwszy basen w okolicy. Chociaż do wyboru jest kilka, dziś odwiedzimy oryginalne miejsce. Te cztery baseny zawierają wysoko
zmineralizowaną wodę termalną. Woda jest faktycznie schładzana do temperatury od 30 do 38 stopni Celsjusza. Wydobywana jest z głębokości 3000 metrów. Poza tym wody te różnią się od innych
występujących w Polsce i zawierają ogromne ilości potasu, sodu, magnezu, wapnia, żelaza i siarki. W związku z tym dostępny jest tutaj szeroki zakres
terapii i zabiegów leczniczych. Niektórzy twierdzą, że te wody
pomagają w utracie wagi, ciśnieniu krwi, problemach z krążeniem, zmęczeniu, stresie i odnalezieniu
wewnętrznego spokoju. Uważam, że prawdziwym powodem, dla którego ktoś by tu przyjechał, jest obcowanie z folklorem i magią Podhala - jednego z najbardziej znanych
miejsc w Polsce. Oczywiście wszyscy skłaniają się ku Zakopanemu, a Zakopane jest cudowne. Jest ciekawe, interesujące i bardzo wygodne, ale też bardzo komercyjne. Dlatego w drodze do tego komercyjnego miejsca, gorąco polecam zatrzymanie się
w miastach takich jak Nowy Targ, aby zobaczyć, jak żyją dziś prawdziwi
góralscy ludzie w 2020 roku. A do tego czasu jestem
Ryan Socash for Poland In.|||Compared to the
 rest of Europe, Polish churches are alive with 
people practicing their faith. Respectful tourists
are welcome. Some come to worship and others 
to remember leading figures in Polish history, such
 as Kazimierz the Great. If you're going to remember
one Polish king, remember Kazimierz the Great, who ruled Poland from Krakow
in the 14th century. Kazimierz was one of those
larger-than-life medieval kings who left his mark
on all fronts. He was a great warrior,
diplomat, patron of the arts,
and womanizer. His scribes bragged Kazimierz
 found Poland made of wood and left it
 made of brick and stone. He even made it
 onto the 50 zloty note. Most of all,
Kazimierz was remembered for being a tolerant
and progressive king. In the 14th century, when other
nations were deporting Jews, King Kazimierz
actively welcomed them. He granted them special banking
and trading privileges and established
the long-standing tradition of Poland being a safe haven
for Jews in Europe. The neighborhood of Kazimierz, 
named for the king, was a thriving and autonomous 
Jewish community for centuries when most of the world's
 Jews lived here in Poland. In the 1930s, a quarter of 
Krakow's population was Jewish. While few Jews
 actually still live here, the spirit of the Jewish
tradition survives. Perhaps the best way
 to enjoy that is at a Klezmer
dinner concert. [ Lively music playing ] Several restaurants
 offer Jewish music from 19th-century Poland with
 their traditional cuisine. As Polish and Jewish culture
mingled here for so many centuries,
 it's hard to distinguish between Jewish
and Polish cuisine. But with ambiance
 like this, it's clear that Jewish
heritage here is a rich one. [ Applause ] While Poles and Jews managed to
live together relatively well, the story became a nightmare with the rise of Nazism
in the 1930s. This thriving Jewish community,
like most in Europe, was decimated
during the Holocaust. The fragile remains
 of the community, historic exhibits
 and its synagogues provide a meditative look at
 how the town was walled in and its residents
 eventually shipped off to nearby
concentration camps. Ultimately, less than 10%
 of Krakow's Jews survived the war
and the death camps. The Jewish cemeteries
of Kazimierz were defiled by the Germans,
 bulldozed by Nazi tanks. Headstones,
 broken under tank treads, now create a moving mosaic
wall and Holocaust monument.|||The main purpose of many people to visit Krakow is...
Drinking and Partying hard. Because alcohol is so cheap here. Here is a wine shop. Let's go inside and checkout the prices. Women in Poland are so beautiful and there are so many women in Krakow. We have just arrived Budapest. The capital city of Hungary. Hello everyone, welcome to another new video. I am in Krakow, which is a city in Poland. The capital of Poland is Warsaw but... there are many other cities like Lords, Krakow, where I am right now. Here is my hotel where I am staying. We'll have a coffee and then we will go to explore the city. This is my friend Vikram. We have to take care of mask here because we had arrived here from Prague. There is a mall on the left and a bus stop behind it.
You can see that. When we arrived to that bus stop, 2 cops came to us immediately. Vikram did't wear his mask properly. So, they just gave us a warning and left away. Otherwise we were not asked for any covid report or vaccination certificate. So it happens, they are lenient and don't mind so much. You might know that Poland is the 9th largest country of Europe. And... it is cheaper than many other countries. In fact Krakow is very cheap than other cities and it's like heaven for the alcohol lovers. And our hotel is also like a 5 Start hotel. It costs us 3500 bucks. And it is very nice. If you compare from other places, you might not get even a sharing room in Paris at this price. And... Krakow is a big city in Poland where we have got this hotel. Temperatue is around -5° to -6° in the day. The time is around 2 PM. Luckily the weather is nice today because the sun is up. Otherwise we haven't seen sunlight in Europe since last 4-5 days. So it feels nice that... we have got some heat. This is a very nice thing in Europe that they give priority to pedestrians. Recently we were crossing the road and there was a taxi driver. We were so far from the zebra crossing and he was almost there. But he just stopped there only and allowed us to cross the road. We crossed the road. e could pass first but he kept waiting due to us for almost 40-50 seconds. And that is so pleasing. You can take these scooters on rent. Install their app and use the code to unlock. Then you can pay and enjoy the ride of the whole town. So now we are going to old town. Old town of Krakow, where you will find mostly cafes, bars, and party places. I am going there for the first time, in Poland. Poland was affected a lot during World War 2. Means this old town is not actually old town because... most of the building were bombed during World War 2. I'm sure about Warsaw that almost all the buildings of old town have been reconstructed. But can't tell about Krakow. Some countries like Czech Republic, Prague. All the castle in Prague are intact. They were not bombed during World War 2. But if we talk about Poland, it's buildings were affected. We have reached near the Krakow Old Town. It's about 600-700 m away from here. You will hear that it is the oldest part of the city. But most of the buildings have been reconstructed. Like you can see this building is also looking old. But I'm pretty sure it was not like this before World War 2. So let's talk about Poland. As I have told you that it's the 9th largest country of Europe. If we talk about ethnicity, most of the people here are Polish population. Most of the people are Christian in religion. Almost 90% and in Christian, most of them are Catholic. The population of Poland is around 40 million. And if we talk about language, people speak Polish here and I found it very similar to Russian. And many young people here can speak English also. I think this is the main square of Old town. This is a church and the place has so much crowd. Christmas tree is decorated but Christmas has passed. The main purpose of many people to visit Krakow is...
Drinking and Partying hard because alcohol is very cheap here. And if you don't know, let me tell you that Vodka was invented in Poland. Many of you might think that it was invented in Russia or Finland. But actually Vodka was invented in Poland. I am wearing a glove in the hand from which I am recording but nothing in this hand. And it's numb now. Women in Poland are so beautiful and there are so many women in Krakow. So everybody has these 2 motives. Alcohol, and Girls.
Vikram, what about you? Wandering with you and falling into the pit. Really! Is that so? This road reminds me of Moscow. The road near red square looks almost similar to this. And people keep walking there like this. Just like Moscow. Here is a wine shop. Let's go inside and checkout the prices. "zl" means Polaish złoty, which is the currency here. 1 Polish złoty equals around 18 Indian Rupees average. If you multiply 3.69 with 18, this beer cost around 66 INR. This beer costs around 50-55 INR. And these are small point beers. Beer is available at these prices here. Point beer and large one. And this is flavored, I think. Fruit flavored for 3.79 zl. Means 60-70 INR. Here we will get Wine, Vodka, Whisky.
Let's check the price of Wines. I have not much knowledge of Wines. But this is most probably Red wine. 500 ml 34 Polish złoty, that means around 500-600 INR. This is for 19.99 zl. 750 ml for around 350 INR. This Martini and all other bottles are very cheap in price for us. This is nice that you can get dairy products also in the wine shop here. Like milk, yogurt, cheese, etc. All these available at wine shop. So it's very nice that milk and alcohol both are available at same place. Hi! Today I'm going to introduce you to a Forex trading platform named "Pocket Option". Pocket option was found in 2017 and today... they continue to develop, improve, and constantly innovating trading experience. Pocket option has more than 100K active users. Trading turnover above $500 million. And it's present in more than 95 countries and regions. The average trader income per month is more than 850 USD. If I tell you about more features of Pocket option, you can trade with more than 100 trading instruments like forex, stocks, crypto. It has more than 50 deposit methods like Paytm, Phonepe, UPI, Rupay, etc. And the best part is, Zero commission on deposit and withdrawal. And you can start investing with minimum 10 USD. They offer 24x7 support service. The feature that makes them standout among other brokers is "S5". You can trade 20% faster with this feature. And the minimum expiration time has been reduced from 60 seconds to 5 seconds for all assets available on the platform... which will help you to trade fast, and earn fast. And if you fear from trading so you can open a demo account. Here you will get 10,000 USD to invest. Checkout "Pocket Option" from the link in description. So this drink was looking something new. And I wanted to try something new today from Poland. So, this is a flavored drink and it has 25% alcohol. See... 200 ml drink. It means 50 ml is alcohol in it. And this is a flavored drink. So I purchased 2 bottles of this and 2 chocolates. Total bill was 33 Polish złoty. This was a costly drink that's why the bill amount is high. This costs around 250 INR. Or may be lesser. The others were cheaper like in 50 INR also... I saw a large beer. It's not so good. Just normal with the taste of fruits. It seems like they have mixed Vodka in fruit juice. So I thought it is overpriced. Krakow is known for nightlife. So I thought I should make a video in the day time. I might not shoot video of nightlife due to darkness. But I don't think there is something interesting to show you in the day. As the sun is about to set, We see people are coming. And this place was empty in the morning. So I'm pretty sure that people come here mostly in the night time. India...
Wooo... So today is the second day in Krakow, Poland. I stopped the video yesterday. And right now we are at Burger King. And... We ordered food because we have to catch a bus in the next 30 minutes for Budapest, Hungary. So we have to go fast to reach the platform. This is the bus stop of Krakow. I'll show you after going outside. The bill for the food is 47 Polish złoty. and it is equal to around 900 INR... which includes fries, a long chicken burger, vegetarian burger. Many people are turning vegan, so Burger King also started offering these options. This was not available earlier in McDonalds or Burger King. And this is a cold drink. These all cost 900 INR. But it's okay. Not so costly as compared to many other options. That is our bus to Budapest. That is about to leave within a few minutes. We've reached at right time. This is a flix bus. Not double decker. Here is a washroom. These are passengers and this is the bus stop. It's almost vacant. This is a village between the border of Poland and Slovakia. First we will enter Slovakia and then after crossing the border, we will reach Hungary. Look A few minutes earlier, there was traffic jam. But that road was fine. But nobody crossed the lane to enter that road. And the jam was cleared easily. This was a good thing. We have just arrived Budapest. The capital city of Hungary. This is the bus stop. Actually we had 2 bus stops. The bus stopped to the other stop before this. Both are at almost same distance from city center. This takes 13 minutes and that one takes around 10 minutes. So we thought that... we will travel to the next stop in the bus and see the places in the city. So we have booked hotel. It's a hostel and we have taken a private room there. The reason is that we have arrived so late. And hostels have a good and lively atmosphere. This doesn't happen in Hotels. So we will move to hostel now and eat something. Then I will update everything before sleeping. Firstly, let's get away from here. Bye... This is our hostel. I have taken a private room here. So let's get in. Here is a coffee machine, this is the common area, and that is a bar counter. And wherever we are seeing, people are having drinks. It means people consume alcohol a lot here. Let's take some coffee. So we are sitting in the waiting area because the work shift of the staff is changing right now. So they asked us to wait for 10-15 minutes. then they will take us to the room. But anyways... I didn't capture Poland a lot in my video, Krakow... because it was so cold at that time. You have noticed we have reached Budapest directly after yesterday's video. It was so sold, around -5° or -6° was the temperature. It was hard to record the video at that time. So we returned back to the hotel. Then we went to Pub Crawl at night and an event was happening there.  I know you are so curios about the nightlife of Krakow. So I had put stories on Instagram. You might have seen. I'll put them in highlights, you can visit to my account and see them. And if I talk about drinks, it was really cheap. One beer or any other drinks were available in 10-12 Polish złoty in the Pub. That means you will get a large glass of beer under 200 INR. Other drinks are also available under 200-250 INR. I told you the estimate in that wine shop about the prices. The light were dim in the club so we couldn't record the video. And... we came back very early. Because it was very cold last night. So that's it. Now we will check-in into a room of this hostel in Budapest and then eat something. People say that Budapest is also cheap if you compare it from Western Europe, and Central Europe. So we don't have any special plans here right now. We will have some light food. And will see a restaurant, pub, cafe etc. from outside only. So this is the hostel room. The room number is 005. The room number is not written on the gate. They told us to enter into the corner room. We found it somehow. I was confused so I went to the reception again. I saw online reviews which were good and that's why I booked it. But it's fine. The bathroom is very spacious. At reception also, they asked us to wait for 15 minutes because the cashier was changing the duty. And they took 50-60 minutes. Wasted so much time. I personally didn't like their service. "a&o hostels" is the name of the hostel. It was not a good experience. But it's okay, we have to stay here tonight only. So let's sleep and... finish the video because there's nothing special to show you. Let's see something better in Budapest tomorrow. Anyways, I hope you like the video. Thank you so much for watching.
Good bye...|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Peter pill Travelers Mark here with [walter] [sterling] today. We're the main square here in Krakow Poland beautiful cities Definitely worth checking out and today We have for you are the [10] things that Shocked tourists when they come here to poland and the first thing that shocked people when they come to poland is The Polish Faith the Polish look when you come here, you'll notice that people walk around Like this just there's no motion. It's not happy it's not [sad]. It's just neutral It's funny because you [see] it anywhere looking the train station you going out to eat you're going to the stores You're going all over the place. They just have the same look Okay, it's like wait a minute kitchen Be happy or sad [or] something up they have it's like dead on look which works really well because you'll see the women here are Gorgeous okay, and when you see them longer. Oh, they're just preparing for their supermodel career because when you're on the Catwalk You don't show any emotion so they actually works really well, but it is kind of funny How the people you know you do have this? Look, and that's the first thing I shock people also kind of going along with the people you might be shocked at look the [polls] are not like the jokes you heard as a Kid they're not done. They're not alcoholic stuff like that. You don't have that. I mean. Yes there are but that's everywhere It's not more or less than you get another country so that also kind of [shocked] the people they come here cuz I'm you saw Those Polish jokes where what is it for Polish people, and how do they don't move the bed or something? You don't have that here the second thing that will shock you when you come here also deals with the polish people are how catholic and how religious the people are I mean I remember going on the buses and Lovely and he's like punk rock guys are on the in there and and they go by a church and they all do the sign Of the cross I'm like whoa. [I] didn't expect that people here in poland are very religious and the churches this is st. Mary honestly the first time I walked in there 20 years ago I would just draw drop [wow] the booths are all blue altar the blue steel and everything It's just amazing and the churches around the country are gorgeous, and they're actually building more churches here. You know other countries They're turning churches into apartments and hotels in bars here people still go to church They still do believe and you do have a very religious conservative feel when the people are here Which is kind of a different thing [and] you go and when you go in the churches? That's the real thing [about] it You really see the beauty of the churches the ones that have them been destroyed during the war that Maybe they've been rebuilt but like here and other ones you really go and just see the majestic beauty of the churches here So do take the chance to go into the churches don't just go oh, it's another church Go in and check it out that kind of leads into the third thing [that'll] shock you when you come to poland It's how much poland was destroyed during the second world war I mean, Krakow was lucky didn't really get destroyed during the war But a lot [of] the other cities were just leveled for example Warsaw when you go there You'll go see the uprising [museum] and realize that everything old and Cracow is actually younger than top of your dad Because they had to rebuild it all after the war because [it] got leveled by the nazis and you'll see that and you go around That's why you'll see the [communist] architecture and the big square long rectangle buildings and stuff like that Because there was nothing there It was all destroyed so they had to rebuild and when you really see the level of destruction Throughout the country and how much they've come back and built new stuff You'll be very proud [of] the people and that's what's really cool about it now the fourth thing [is] Gonna Shock you [anna] come to Poland is how completely incomprehensible and illegible the polish language is look if you don't speak Polish [it's] okay the locals know you don't speak polish [also] try to think polish with you, but oh Just to one of those languages you're listing at the train station. You're like. Yeah, I got nothing yeah, I don't know it's City I'm going to it is [a] very tough language It's very hard to pronounce like how do you say? Prz in a row and there's like a hat and there's an L with a line through it Is that a zero well? What is that you do get pretty confused when you are here? And it is kind of shocking that you can't even make out some of the stuff now We are developing better for tourism so you will have a lot of you know English menus and stuff like that But it is a really good idea to know some polish before you come like [Julia]. Which is like Thank you for the steam is please things like that because it really get those people to go from You say not pure protein oh Yes, they polish, and they really open up then okay The first thing [that] might shock you is your eating experience here the [poles] really love their potatoes And their cabbage and even if it's not on the menu like it might tell it to cutlet [night] It'll come with Cabbage and potatoes here I go [ah] I'll have [the] port of the pork knuckle and said oh it comes of pork and calves what? I'll just have the rolls oh cabbage roll, okay Look, you're going to have a lot of cabbage. You're Gonna Have a lot [of] potatoes when you are here and there are some pretty good foods like the pierogi You're going to have that when you're here I might actually like the meat when I was here too in the potatoes good show the potatoes [but] [it's] all the time with the perfect cabbage of the potatoes again and again and again. That's why yesterday I just got the cabbage rolls I'm like look because that I know I'm getting the cabbage Haha, but it came with a side of mashed potatoes And I just liked it laughs okay also kind of interesting is they really love their tea here, too Now the sixth thing that might shock you as a tourist is You notice there's not very many tourists now in Cracow you do get about ten million tourists a year I mean, this is a very popular place because it's gorgeous, and I'll talk about that towards the end But honestly there's not a lot of tourists actually come to poland and so when you go around you really are kind of a special Tourist because you are actually here you might get people going Why are you luling and wiring? Whoosh? Why are you here? You know [some] places like cracow it's obvious You know we go around and there's just so few tourists out there that you're like Hey
I can kick back relax And do [ok] and what kind of [leave] thought of that is our next shock is how Cheap it is here because there's not a lot [of] [tours] driving up the prices It's nice because you can have a very affordable vacation here in poland rooms Accommodation food drink making merry all kinds of stuff And you'll see a lot of people come to like krakauer Warsaw to go have a party weekend and stuff like that because you really can your money goes a lot farther here than other places And that's what's really cool now the next thing. It's going to shock when you are here is the amount of natural beauty and space In poland look it's the huge countries are the biggest countries in Europe and the thing is you're going to be going between these different Towns, [but] it was on a bus or a train things like that not super fast razor fast enough trains And you're going to run and it's just Amazing how big the [crush] [me] is but also the natural beauty you see when you go through there And what's nice is when you go through and you can go if you're in the [north] you're going to get on okay? Well, that's one right there drock alan and ganache on my [food] favorites [yup] [and] ganache You come down a bit you go over the [missourian] legs and see the castle. That's right by there the [montmartre] castle which is on the way towards there go to the lakes and enjoy that go to the coast in [the] north in this south you've Got the Tatras [mountains] and you go to Zakopane and stay there tons of Europeans Go there to Ski in the winter because yes, it's beautiful And it's cheap remember I said before but you have this [natural] beauty like wow this really is I Understand why they have all their tourism? Propaganda is about you know the natural beauty of poland because it really is beautiful having said that the next thing else shock you is how Amazing the town squares are here in poland yes here in Cracow You've got the the cloth hall over here the checkout. You've got the st.. Mary's church over there You've got all these [things] inside you've got all these things to go and see and this is actually the largest town square and the European in Europe and it's Amazing, but it's not just here you go to Warsaw the [Fuel/air] Old Town square They really built from scratch Rock club goes through the [old-time] [Lublin] combat GDansk the portrait of garage man You just walk around there see the neptune statue you like man. This is so cool. [and] you have all these beautiful Squares you have all these beautiful Buildings that have been rebuilt after the war or maybe they're still there from before the war you Have that beauty that I'm not a lot of people think of because when they think of poland you're thinking of you know It's just it's farmland and stuff like that and look there is just amazing places here in poland so it's definitely worth checking out And the ten thing that might shock you we need to come to poland is the lack of service so remember that polish Faith This is your service It's not the most attentive. It's not the most friendly you'll get your food. It'll just take some [time] But just [no] homelessness are the most Service-oriented economy out there so you need to have some patience when you are when you are coming here and Probably, that's the only thing that shocks you kind of in a bad way is really the service here isn't the best But it's getting better. [I] used [to] come here a lot in the early 2000s for work and compared to you know 2017 versus 2007 Or 2002 And it is it's completely different anyway I hope that helps [you] know a few things that might shock you before you come to poland it is a great country to visit Because you're one of the few tourists coming here to see something [real] [emitting] like right now So I will learn more Five things you love and hate about Warsaw what you should eat when you come here to poland check us on our website at Walters [worldcom] [where] us on Twitter Facebook Instagram [YouTube] and we really appreciate your life subscriptions and if you do subscribe to our [channel] We actually put out two travel videos every week every Wednesday and Saturday And we really appreciate those likes and it's got comments the things that [shucks] you about poland who did that comment section below? So I'm sorry talk so fast this video. I just got really excited about my time here in poland live from Krakow or Chuckles. Sorry my|||Narrator: Poland has been dubbed
the worst place to live in the European Union if you are LGBTQ+. In recent years, around 100 local authorities
across the country have signed declarations against
what they call LGBT ideology. In the face of attacks
and hostile hate speech, activists continue to fight back. They march in pride events
around the country and have even managed to pressure some
councils to backtrack on their declarations. Still, much of Poland
remains a virtual no-go area. LGBTQ people in Poland told us
they now feel more alienated and afraid than ever. The situation is getting
only worse and worse. We are basically treated not like human beings. Narrator: In the spring of 2019, the quiet town of Kraśnik
in southeast Poland signed a declaration saying that
being lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, or queer undermines traditional values and Polish family life. Jan Albiniak is an elected
official in Kraśnik who voted in favor of the
declaration against so-called LGBTQ ideology. Narrator: He believes that pride
marches, and even mentioning LGBTQ issues in schools, damages traditional Polish family values. The declarations are not laws, but they send out a clear
message to the local LGBTQ community.
In Kraśnik, Adam Cezary Gąska flies the only rainbow flag we could find. For him, it's a protest against the
town's homophobic stance.
 
But when he put it up in
2020, it soon attracted some unwanted attention. Adam is keeping his flag, as
well as his faith in the future. It has never been easy for
LGBTQ people in Poland, which is staunchly
conservative and Catholic. But support for LGBTQ rights, and the number of pride marches,
has grown steadily over the last 20 years. When the right-wing and
euro-skeptic Law and Justice party came to power
in 2015, the tone changed. First, they framed migrants
as the national threat. But by the 2019 election cycle, they'd switched attention to
demonizing the LGBTQ community as a way of rallying voters
against a perceived threat. Narrator: This is when towns like Kraśnik began signing declarations or
adopting so-called "family charters." And in the 2020 presidential runoff, President Andrzej Duda beat the
pro-Europe and pro-LGBT-rights mayor of Warsaw with his hard-line stance. One of his main campaign
messages: Being gay is, quote, "an ideology worse than communism." Other religious and political
leaders have likened it to Nazism or a disease. Miłosz: We are called the rainbow plague. We are basically treated
not like human beings, which has even been said, that LGBT is not people -- it's an ideology. Narrator: Also in 2020, 200,000
people signed a petition calling for a ban on all pride marches and
delivered it to parliament. And in June 2021, the education minister called
an equality parade through Warsaw and insult to public morality, the latest official outcry
in one of the most religious countries on the continent. Many fear that the language
employed by local councils and central government could be a
precursor for a clampdown on rights -- and even physical violence. While much of Europe is seeing the rise of
progressive, inclusive policies around same-sex
marriage and adoption, in Poland both are outlawed. And with the help of the
right-wing, state-owned media, the notion that being gay
or trans is an ideology is gaining traction. In Polish we say that if you
throw enough mud on somebody, some of it will stick. You would expect that
reasonable people would say, "Well, that's bulls---." But if you hear this bulls---
all the time, you know, the repeated message all the
time saying the same things or the same awful things, some of this will stay in people's heads. Narrator: About 25 kilometers
south of Kraśnik is the district of Niedrzwica Duza. The town council here signed
a declaration a couple of days before Kraśnik did, in May 2019. Kazimierz
Strzelec was stunned. Narrator: Kazimierz has been a
devout Catholic all his life. He's also a gay-rights activist
and organizes pride events every year. He says since the polarizing political
hate campaigns of the last few years, things have got worse, and
now even feels rejected by members of his own church. In 2019, he helped organize the second-ever
pride march in the nearby city of Lublin. At the march, police arrested a couple
carrying a homemade bomb. Narrator: Equality marches, as they're known in Poland,
were banned as recently as 2007. They have become more widespread,
with an estimated 25 held across the country in 2019. But they still face
considerable opposition. Kazimierz has particularly
strong memories of the first ever march in the northeastern
city of Bialystok, which descended into violence in July 2019. Narrator: But the fight back is underway. After towns began signing their declarations in 2019, a group of activists started
a campaign of naming and shaming. An online map called the
Atlas of Hate pinpoints every place that has signed
declarations or so-called family charters, which both claim to want
to halt the spread of LGBT ideology. The map inspired Polish
gay-rights activist Bart Staszewski to then put
up signs at the entrance to each town declaring them "LGBT-free." Bart: So I created a sign, the "LGBT-free zone" sign that I bring with me to the cities that declare as LGBT-free. I put it there. I invite people who are brave enough to join my project from those cities, the LGBT people, to make a
testimonial of how they feel being excluded from the local community. Narrator: And he worries about the future. Bart: The young people are
afraid of coming out because the atmosphere is simply homophobic. Those poor kids that
are committing suicide because of the homophobia
in Poland, because they are just afraid
of coming out, because there are families, parents throw them out from the
homes because they heard on TV that they are kind of demons, and
they are perverts, or whatever. Narrator: Both the map and Bart's guerrilla tactics
got international media attention, and the declarations
drew a scathing response from the EU. So I want to be crystal clear: LGBTQI-free zones are humanity-free zones, and they have no place in our union. Narrator: Those behind the map
were nominated for a prestigious human-rights award from
the European Union. Towns highlighted began to pay the price
for their homophobia, losing access to European funds. Kraśnik lost millions in grant
money from Norway, and was dropped by its twin city in
France. Then, in April 2021, Kraśnik backed down and
repealed its declaration. In the months that followed,
other towns followed suit. But large swathes of
the map are still red. And a group of local governments
are suing the activists behind the Atlas of Hate for slander. In many countries, younger generations tend
to be more progressive. But in Poland, these deeply entrenched beliefs
are held by old and young alike. The All-Polish Youth is a far-right
nationalist movement here ... Narrator: Miłosz Przepiórkowski
runs a charity offering counseling and support for Poland's LGBTQ community. Miłosz: We can only see how
devastated they are by the fact that they are not accepted for who they are. So this is very tragic,
especially for young people. Narrator: He surveyed 10,000 young
LGBTQ people across the country in 2016 together with a
consortium of organizations. They found that 70% had suicidal
thoughts or were depressed compared to less than half
of American LGBTQ+ youth. And almost 70% of LGBTQ people
of all ages in Poland had been the focus of homophobic abuse. Miłosz: I think it's very important
to show them that they have a place where they can get real
support. That there are people who are like them. There are people who can help them. It is a human right to feel protected in their own state,
to have this dignity and having the right to marry whenever, who they like. It's not hurting anybody, and they
need to state that this is true. We are not hurting anybody. We just demand equality,
not the privilege. Narrator: When Kasik considers
his struggle for equality in Poland, he takes an optimistic view,
and an inspirational quote:|||[Music] there's nothing here to remind me of my birthplace there was once a beautiful square morinovsky square i remember trees and benches i was born in warsaw into a traditional jewish family i went to a preschool for jewish children where they taught polish at home we spoke yiddish but i had no problem with the polish language we he had this trick where he'd pretend to stitch his fingers together with a needle of course he made a huge impression on us kids would be horrified he had a daughter called lonya who was friends with my sister sometimes i can see it more clearly than the warsaw around me today in my memory it's still the same in the morning warm pretzels would be delivered they were called bagels you won't find bagels like those anywhere these days you could take one and untwist it my parents lived at 49 it was a so-called i remember we had to recite prayers some children would say they didn't know the prayers i was sitting in a sand pit and my mum came over she said there's a war what are we going to do [Music] it's the special quality of the nazi system people who had the energy to develop something had the power to do it when mr dengel took over in warsaw in early december 39 he had the idea to invite hubert cross to come to warsaw and build a german baufa vailton growth upon the advice of mr dengle developed a dream of reducing warsaw to next to nothing on the screen is the visualization from one of my projects it's based on fascist plans for the construction of a new german city the neues this is a virtual reconstruction of that new warsaw this is the city center it's a relatively small city the entrances were to be guarded by watchtowers on all sides these are the main buildings of the new german warsaw deutsche state varsity there was to be a district for poles who would be slowly exterminated the new german city of warsaw was to be inhabited only by germans there was to be no jewish population with regard to warsaw the fuhrer has decided that the reconstruction of that city as a major polish metropolis is absolutely out of the question the fuhrer's wish is that in accordance with plans for the territory's development under the general government warsaw be reduced to the level of a provincial city from the diary of governor general hunts frank once the germans arrived the terror began almost right away with various official announcements and notices all jews were forced to wear armbands with the star of david it was offered in my mind this was a form of degradation at any moment i could be humiliated in the spring of 1940 consultations began with a view to creating one or more jewish housing districts within the city of warsaw in the end however it was decided that a single district should be established in the area where jews were traditionally the majority dr friedrich s s untersturmfuhrer head of division of regional planning office of the governor of the district of warsaw [Music] where was the jewish neighborhood in warsaw there were jewish neighborhoods yeah lefke novolipki where it was almost all jewish but when you when you're a third of the city you're all over the city and the interaction with non-jews was a normal daily event that comes to a crashing halt with the building of the warsaw ghetto wall which goes through the heart of the city and divides jews from non-jews as they were never divided before [Music] the wall didn't appear suddenly bits and pieces of wall started to be built from april 1940. these were sections of wall or barriers with barbed wire they popped up in various places [Music] i had no idea i was jewish so first i was asking why do we have to move and later what does it mean that i'm jewish and why do we have to leave our homes [Music] yes when we arrived in the ghetto the first thing i saw was a horrible poster i didn't want to be like that jew on the poster and i was distraught at being forced to live there i thought that every jew had to look like that i was so terribly humiliated by all this i said to my mum i didn't want to be a jew anymore that i wanted to go back to martial street and why was all this happening anyway notice by order of the district governor and effective immediately a self-contained jewish quarter is to be created in the district of warsaw with a view to preventing the spread of disease in the city of warsaw a boundary running around the jewish quarter has been established all border streets are to be closed off from it on both sides as follows from gielna to krulevska and zwata from zwata to jielna and jalasna from tuvada to jalasna and srebrena from srebrena to tavada and miyajana from miyajana to srebrena and kajimiresh square so so so so we already lived in the area that was now the ghetto because moronowski square was inside the area jews who lived outside the ghetto had to move in and polls who lived in the ghetto had to move out this led to very painful situations for people they left their homes they left their furniture and possessions carrying only a few small bundles with them the ghetto became very crowded [Music] we've all seen the images of the expulsion of the jewish community something similar happened the other way around too there were tens of thousands of people like us i remember sitting on a cart full of our [Music] things [Music] [Music] apartment 110. measures involve the resettlement of around 700 ethnic germans 113 000 poles and 138 000 jews the warsaw jewish housing district is an enclosed area cut off from its surroundings by walls fences and so on movement of persons and goods in and out of the area is by special permit only dr friedrich golett s s untersturmfuhrer head of division of regional planning office of the governor of the district of warsaw [Music] the jewish population always looked for contacts but my mother put aside potatoes and feelings for her later lania stopped coming she and my father just ceased to exist i don't remember any farewell or any of the circumstances maybe my memories suppressed it because it was too terrible the city center was cut off and ceased to function normally when you see which part of the city made up the ghetto you realize it was really the heart of warsaw if you take into account that the germans also carved off a piece for themselves what was left of warsaw for other residents was just a small part the german housing district has been created for the protection of the german population at their request the police cannot guarantee germans living outside of this district the same degree of personal safety as is provided to those living within it hans fliegner nazi party star slighter warsaw [Music] night and day by rail in carts and buses jews arrive here from polish towns and villages the individual vanishes in this enormous human mass people are crammed in individual faces are unrecognizable [Music] the german army and civilians must in any event be protected from the jews immune carriers of disease the separation of jews from the rest of the population polish as well as ethnic germans is a moral and political imperative traffic in the centre of warsaw has also been only minimally affected by the creation of the jewish housing district in the interests of the wehrmacht and the economy great care was taken to ensure that certain main thoroughfares would remain crossable without obstruction to through traffic valdemarchon s s standard fura director of department of resettlement office of the governor of the district of warsaw [Music] the german planners divided things up each administering their division they even designated which streets a tram would travel along to shorten its route through the ghetto that created two ghettos it was all a terrifying mishmash of evil wadna street ended up dividing the jewish district the district was cut into two parts by the critically important tram line that ran along the ghetto was divided into two parts a small ghetto and a large one in order for jews to move back and forth between the small and the large ghetto it was necessary to stop the flow of traffic at intervals since this was inconvenient for the germans jews were given permission to cross over as infrequently as possible as i walked along jalajna i would see from a distance the crowd milling at the corner of kodner people would be shifting restlessly on the spot waiting for the german police to decide when the traffic on kwatner was light enough and the crowd on zalajna thick enough to warrant letting the jews across the street when the moment finally came the police cordon would part and the impatient crowd would surge forward in both directions pushing each other over in the panic to distance themselves from the dangerous german presence and melt once more into the depths of the two ghettos a line in the pavement shows where the ghetto border ran how the ghetto fit into warsaw it wasn't an isolated island surrounded by the unknown it was embedded in the city in each plaque there's a marker showing where we are the parts of downtown warsaw that were torn away are elevated and my intention was to show the ghetto in real space how it was and where the boundary ranked who didn't have a lot of money or didn't have a pole who was his friend didn't stand a chance there was nothing he could do he cared only about what he would eat the next day and what he would give his children about 80 of food in the ghetto came from smuggling not from the official suppliers authorized by the germans if someone had money they could get things into the ghetto somehow i once witnessed a tram passing through muranowski square and as it turned the corner items were thrown out it couldn't stop in the ghetto this was how trade carried on in some places the ghetto walls did not come right down to the pavement at regular intervals there were openings at ground level through which water flowed into drains running along the sidewalks these openings were also used by children for smuggling tiny dark creatures with legs like matchsticks would converge on these openings from all sides terrified eyes darted from left to right and frail paws dragged through bundles that were often bigger than the tiny smugglers themselves so so [Music] [Music] notice any jew unlawfully leaving the designated housing district is to be punished by death the same punishment will apply to persons who consciously protect such jews or in any way assist them warsaw 10th of november 1941 dr fisher governor is a very important street for me this is a street i was scared of and i still am to this day i've never walked this street without feeling afraid behind this wall i spent more than two years in the ghetto with my family when i first found myself back here i began looking obsessively for the hole through which my mum and i had escaped i just stood there going back in time trying to figure where that hole could be but the hole was probably somewhere else further on i see two years of humiliation imprisonment hunger i still expect to either see or remember something terrible there [Music] [Music] so [Music] so all around i could see handcarts and on them bodies of men women and children piled carelessly one on top of the other i became aware of a strange vaguely sweet and sickening odor but never smelled before [Music] a jewish policeman explained next to the jewish cemetery there was once a large field today it's one of the biggest mass graves ever filled with the bodies of jews from all corners of europe could this be real how is it possible that a human being of flesh and blood should have to die in such a pitiful fashion the german occupation murdered 90 of the jews here it's heartbreaking and then if you could imagine that not only does the wall go through the heart of the city right in the middle of a street it stops but on the other side of that wall starvation disease and very soon after deportation to death for security reasons i order that the ghetto of warsaw be demolished all utilizable building parts and other materials of any value are to first be salvaged an overall plan for the raising of the ghetto is to be submitted to me we must in any event ensure that the living space occupied until now by five hundred thousand sub-humans and in no way fit for habitation by germans disappears completely and that warsaw this city of one million always a center of corruption and revolt is reduced in size heinrich himmler reichsfuhrer ss at the same time as an organized resistance group was preparing to fight jews in the ghetto were going into i went into that bunker in january 43 and in april the uprising broke out my brothers left to take part in the uprising this bunker was built around a basement that had been dug deeper with boarded up sides the dugout earth was piled up all around and it provided some kind of insulation when the fires started everything in the neighboring basements collapsed and burned but this bunker survived [Music] i remember 1943 seeing uncanny clouds of smoke rising from the north fighting in the ghetto something was happening there [Music] there is no longer a jewish quarter of warsaw jurgen stroup s s gruppenfuhrer it still pains me that after all these years i never got to mourn my family i never even had time for that i lost everyone i had six brothers and a sister and parents i'm the only one who survived it all i was left as a witness without me there'd be nobody the value of life is in bearing witness street concentration camp was set up to hold people needed to demolish the ghetto it wasn't only blown up with dynamite but also dismantled it was completely plundered and that camp was hell people died there on the ruins of the ghetto the nazis wanted to create a park for germans hence the demolition the area was to be covered over with earth and turned into a garden paradise the intention was to destroy the capital of what was formerly poland that was the main intention to destroy the idea alone of a capital because there was no more poland i spent almost a year on the aryan side there was a whole network of helpers if things got dangerous someone would come by and take you by the hand [Music] on the 1st of august 1944 the uprising broke out twice i lived through the burning of warsaw all around the walls were almost red-hot and people were being herded along on both sides of the streets burning debris was coming down warsaw was on fire and you could feel it [Music] after liberation in 1945 you couldn't live in warsaw really and slowly trying to rebuild and then getting again undermined by soviet occupation and oppression it's difficult to imagine what was here before the war this area has changed so much certain streets and squares ceased to exist names were changed directions were altered no more than a dozen or so original buildings have survived this area has many layers underneath the ground is a second layer which shows itself when workers dig down to lay pipes then the remains of the past are uncovered in 1949 the architect created a housing estate which was to be a memorial space what was unique was that the bricks of the buildings were made from rubble on top of whatever else that was in the rubble including human remains that stands out because warsaw is a flat city [Music] people calling me and saying there are spirits in my apartment i'm in the old ghetto can you do something well i have this that's beyond my competence but i did go and i said psalms because if a person feels i could make them if i make someone feel more at peace then i'm happy to do so [Music] [Music] [Music] [Music] on this map i've marked the location of your former home superimposing it on the current image it was on this street at the intersection that's where your home used to be i was born here [Music] [Music] the memory of the ghetto it's beginning to really return into the memory into the soul of warsaw give people a chance to remember and chances are they will remember april 19th the anniversary of the warsaw uprising while we're moving farther away from the event actually the number of people coming is growing that's a sign of hope [Music] [Music] [Music] [Music] [Music] you|||Holidays are a time when each of us is looking for a pleasant, light reading and I would like to recommend such reading to you today, or actually two such readings. Of course, we remain on the Polish topic and both readings will be about Poland. I am Ania, I am a teacher of Polish as a foreign language, and apart from Polish, I love all the languages ​​of the world. And this is Płynnie po polsku, channel for learners of the Polish language. And not only. First of all, it is a book by Bernard Newman entitled "Pedalling Poland", that is, the Second Polish Republic. Bernard Newman was obviously not a Polish writer, but an English one. Bernard Newman was an Englishman. And besides being a writer, he was also a traveler, so he was describing his travels. In his books, he described very often how he traveled in certain countries. He also just described his journey through the former Poland, which then in the years 1918-1945 - let me remind you - was called the Second Polish Republic. Today, we could say that such a country does not exist anymore, because the Second Polish Republic also included areas that are not part of Poland today, such as Vilnius and Lviv. And Bernard Newman rode a bicycle in these areas. It is an absolutely fascinating story, written with fantastic English ironic humor. Bernard Newman also described not only his next stages of the journey, because he traveled all over the country, he reported his trips to Gdańsk, Kraków, Silesia, Warsaw, he also described his struggles with learning the Polish language, which for me was probably the most interesting part. He was amazed that we had so many declensions. He also described his mistakes, but also his little successes. That is why I think this book is a fantastic choice for a vacation, because it is very light, very pleasant, and at the same time we can learn a lot about Poland and Polish. I think it is especially interesting if you can read it in the original, because it is written in the original in English, of course. I read it in Polish and I recommend it as well, because the translation was really, very good. Apart from describing specific regions or cities, Bernard Newman focused more on meeting people, on such episodes from the everyday life of the town he was in, the village or the city. And I think that this also made this book a picture of how Poles lived then, what they ate for breakfast, where they worked, how they behaved, which was strange for them and what was strange for an Englishman then in Poland and in Poles. The second reading I would like to recommend to you is Zbigniew Rokita's report entitled "Kajś. A ​​Tale of Upper Silesia". The book may be a bit more difficult than the previous one. This time the book was written in the original Polish by a Polish author. And about Poland again. More specifically, about Upper Silesia, which is one of the regions of Poland. I think this book is interesting not only for foreigners, but also for Poles, because I learned a lot from it. I must admit that I reached for it without conviction, that is, I had to force myself to finally start reading it. But I was not disappointed, it was really amazing. And I did not expect it to be so light, so pleasant to read. Rather, reportages remind me of pages filled with a lot of information, so much that after a few pages I cannot read any further and have to put them aside. Of course, I like reportage very much, but it is often informative reading. This report was written like a story, a bit like a novel actually. And I think that's why it surprised me so pleasantly, because I felt like I was really immersed in this reading, deep in history. And really a family history, because it is a family history, it was very immersive. It's such a new word maybe. We often say that books are immersive. Immersive, they immerse us, which means they are very, very interesting. We cannot tear ourselves away from them. So much for my today's recommendations. Very short and very fast. But I hope that you will choose one of these two for your vacation to learn something about Poland. And maybe read some of these books in Polish. Let me know in the comments what your reading is for the holidays, I hope it is something in Polish, or at least that it is about Poland. And we will see you in the next episode. See you, bye bye!|||Did you know that Poland has the third lowest unemployment rate in  the European Union? There is still not enough people to work. Not only in new technologies or IT sectors, although first of all, but also in the service industry and construction.  Does it pay to work in Poland? You're about to find out! Cześć! I'm Weronka from Wellcome Home and I'm your guide for your relocation to Poland. Today I'm going to tell you about our labor market in Poland. If you're looking for a job you have to know our labor system, different types of agreements and the most common benefits. Many of them can really surprise you!  Types of agreements, which one will be the best for you? When browsing job offers it's important to understand what type of agreement is offered to you. Listen carefully, because here I'll also mention what to do to work in Poland legally.  What types of agreements do we have in Poland and which one will be the best for you? Employment contact, in Polish it is umowa o pracę. it’s the primary form of agreement in Poland. Later on, when referring to salaries and most common benefits, I’ll refer to this contract. A full-time job has an 8 hour work day, for 40 hours per week. It can be signed for a definite or indefinite time period. Usually at the beginning there's a 3-month trial period. There is a notice period and minimum monthly wage. I'll talk later about this. Pros? You have a stable employment and regular pay. In Poland you get paid no later than on the 10th. Also, you have a health insurance, paid sick leave, paid vacation,  maternity leave, the longest in Europe! Cons? Lack of flexibility and again the notice period, especially if you're the one who wants to leave early.  Contract of mandate in Polish is umowa zlecenie. It's popular especially for students and first time job seekers.  There’s no minimum number of hours per month. And there’s a minimum wage. Pros? It’s flexible and you’re insured you have paid sick leave and maternity leave. Cons? No paid vacations and a rather low salary. Also, it can also be terminated at any time. Specific-task contract - umowa o dzieło.  Is a specific contract on which both parties agree on the result of the work and not a process itself. It’s flexible, with no defined work hours. Cons? No insurance nor other benefits and no minimum wage.  It’s good if it's a sideline for your main job. And what about self employment? In Poland, you can run a one person company and provide your services to companies based on a B2B contract. Some companies may accept, or even prefer such a contract to work with you. You pay personal income tax (PIT) and social and health premiums. The basic income tax is 17%. Pros: You’re independent, flexible and you can provide your services to many companies. You’re also more cost-effective for the employer than when hiring an employee directly. Cons? You have to pay your taxes yourself and you deal with all the red tape.  Also, this solution is beneficial only above a certain salary amount. Would you like to know more about self-employment in Poland? Let me know in the comments.  Important info for foreigners Whether you can legally work in Poland depends on your citizenship and/or the visa on which you came here. We talk about this in detail in the video: 7 things to know before coming to Poland. One more thing!  Make sure to apply for a PESEL number. It's needed to settle your annual taxes. We talk about this in details in the previously mentioned video. Make sure to check it out. Ok, time for something you’re here for - money!  Beware the advertised salary isn’t the same as your take home pay. Let me explain this. Advertised salaries in job offers are usually given in gross amounts they haven’t deducted income tax and insurance you have to pay The final amount (the one that will take home) is the net amount  after taxes and insurance have been paid. But! The total cost to the employer is your gross salary plus some additional premiums he has to pay for you. 2022 is a crazy year we’ve faced a huge tax reform - a New Polish Deal. and to understand all the calculations is kinda tough. but let me give you an example. to get 5000 zł net (your take home) your gross salary should be around 7000 zł, although the total cost for the employer is 8500 zł because of the additional premiums he had to pay. The Polish minimum monthly wage is currently 3010 gross, around 2200 zł net. The hourly rate, if you work, for example, on a contract of mandate is around 20, just under 14 zł net. Not much, but the average monthly wage in Poland at the beginning of 2022 was about 6100 PLN gross, just under 4400 PLN net, quite a jump. You can expect the minimum wage or close to it when working in the service industry - as a server or sales person especially if you’re just starting out in the labor market.   Unfortunately, government employees in Poland also earn closer to the minimum wage rather than the average salary.  Higher salaries are possible in private companies in growing industries, hold on a second, I'll get to them soon. Now your question surely is: how do I know my final net salary?  There are special online payroll calculators. Check the link to some in description. Your first 30 000 zł is tax-free. Above that the tax is 17% - up to 120,000 zł per year, the first tax bracket, and above this amount the tax is 32%. Important: Employees under 26 don’t pay income tax. So this is somehow intended to compensate for a lower salary when starting out. And where to search for a good job in Poland? Before we get into this, you have to know the following issues. Did you know that in Poland, after having a baby, a woman can return to work after up to 4 years of leave?  What are  some other employee benefits in Poland? Remember, we are still talking about a full-time basic employment contract. 26 days of paid vacation per year These are weekdays, without weekends. On top of that there are 13 public holidays per year! What’s more, if a holiday falls on a Saturday, a day off can be used another time. Paid sick leave is 80% of your pay. Pregnant women get full pay on sick leave. Remember: it must be issued by a doctor. Maternity leave in Poland lasts 52 weeks - the longest in Europe!  20 weeks apply to the mother, she receives 100% of pay. Then the mother or father can  take "parental" leave for another 32 weeks, receiving 60% of their salary. This for a total of one year. You can add to this your paid vacation days that accumulated during that period. but it’s not over… After that you can have… extended post-maternity leave for another 3 years! You don’t get paid, but you’re still an official employee with health insurance and your old-age pension insurance paid. The notice period depends on seniority Up to 6 months seniority it’s 2 weeks up to 3 years - a month and above that your notice period is 3 months. This is a safeguard for you, but also for the employer - so that the employee doesn’t suddenly leave. You can leave earlier if your employer agrees but he doesn’t have to. And additionally, a pregnant woman cannot be fired in Poland. A work day is usually 8 hours including ONLY a 15-minute lunch break. Yeah, that’s official law  but more and more companies agree to flexible work hours, so you decide when you start, when you have a break. And hybrid working models with some days from home. Don’t be afraid to negotiate! If you’re still here, it means you’re really thinking of working in Poland.  Time for some previously-mentioned data. Top 3 best paid professions in Poland are brand manager, key account manager, and IT Security Specialist. They can expect around 10 000 zł gross a month. Software developers rank 7th, but this is an average salary.  An experienced Senior Developer can expect 15 000 zł. The fastest growing sectors with an ongoing need for skilled employees are IT, telecommunications, marketing, and e-commerce. Although starting salaries may be lower, many jobs are also waiting in construction, the services and hospitality industries, the medical profession, and logistics.  Well, the best way is to search online. he biggest website for job offers in Poland is pracuj.pl. It’s available in Polish and Ukrainian only, but many offers are published in English. It’s Poland’s number 1 website for jobs. If you're in the so-called “creative industry” we recommend rocketjobs.pl. Offers here often include the salary scale, which isn’t always given in Poland. So you already know what you’re fighting for and you can avoid the most embarrassing question you can get during an interview which is how much would you like to earn? Are you curious how Polish salaries compare to the cost of living? Is it possible to get by? Take a look at our previous video about living costs in Poland. I really want to know what surprised you the most! Good luck! 
See you in Poland.|||STORY ON WGN TV DOT COM. ERIN IVORY, WGN NEWS. RAY CORTOPASSI: HE LIVED IN AND SO TOUCHING. KAREN, THANK YOU. POPULAR BUS DROP IN POLAND IS CHANGING ITS NUMBER OF BUS. NUMBER 6, 6, 6, RUNS TO A TOWN. NAME. HELL. NOT ONLY HAS WON OVER. CRITICS SAY THAT TOO CLOSE TO ENGLISH WORD FOR HELP BACKLASH FROM SOME CHRISTIAN GROUPS PROMPTED THE|||there are more and more indications that the winter of 223 224 will be one of the worst moments for Ukraine since the beginning of the epidemic. Russia, despite some successes and the operation aimed at breaking through the left bank of the Dnieper, the Ukrainian offensive is at an impasse and Russia seems to be preparing for a massive attack which may actually happen At any moment, President of Ukraine Volodymyr Zelensky warned against the possibility of an increase in Russian attacks on Ukraine's infrastructure this winter. In one of his last speeches, he emphasized that Ukraine must prepare for an increased number of drone or missile attacks on the country's infrastructure. Zelensky also thanked several countries, including Poland, for the support provided to Ukraine in strengthening its air defense. However, there are many indications that if this country finds itself against the proverbial wall, Poland will have to provide assistance, as usual, because we and Romania are the only ones who can save Ukraine from energy collapse. Poland and Romania are said to have already prepared high-voltage transformers which the Ukrainians will take when they need them, as written in The economist. According to the undp report, in April 2023, the electricity generation capacity in Ukraine decreased by 51 % compared to the period just before the Russian invasion in February 2022, although Ukraine boasts of improving its anti-missile shield with the help of, among others, Poland, the USA or other allied countries, the strike force that Russia is currently gathering in Crimea may shake the stability of the Ukrainian state, so Poland can expect further Ukrainian requests for help, and it is now receiving them as a partner Today's material is the Ley shops cashback platform, to use their services you need to go to the link in the description and then download the application or log in to the platform, for example using Facebook or Google, the whole process is very simple and will take only a few seconds Leti shops also has the option yes called hot cashback, for example, it is now available on Allegro hot cashback from your purchases will be five times larger than standard, so it's worth hurrying because it's a really good opportunity, you can save much more money, and no matter how you look at it, the holidays are coming now, so money for gifts They will definitely come in handy. Leti shops also thought about this by creating a lottery for you in which you can win as much as PLN 100,000. You have time to enter this lottery from November 20, 2023 to December 22, 2023 at 6:00 p.m. All you need to do is register in Leti Shop, accept the lottery regulations and make purchases in selected partner stores using their platform, for each purchase you receive lottery tickets, link to Leti Shop from their lottery and hot cashback on Allegro are in the description I think it's worth using, there will always be something left in your pocket Well, now it's time for today's material, I invite you energy from Polish power plants has been saving Ukraine from Blackout for a long time Our neighbor in mid-August was struggling with heat and record demand for electricity, so he bought energy from us on an unprecedented scale, as the Ukrainian network operator explained, this is the best option But the alternative is to turn off electricity to consumers before the Russian invasion. Ukraine was able to produce much more energy than it consumed. This allowed it to survive when part of the energy system was destroyed by the invaders. It also had transformers that had just been decommissioned and could be reconnected to the grid when the Russians destroyed them. the newer ones, nevertheless, between October 10 and the end of December last year, the average Ukrainian household did not have electricity for a total period of five weeks, hence Ukraine has now informed Poland that in the event of further infrastructure destruction it will need it. Once again, energy support from Poland, of course, Kiev has pay for this energy because, as you know, if there were deliveries for the glory of the homeland, many Poles would probably not be satisfied with this fact, especially since the relations between Poland and Ukraine have recently become significantly cooler, but the authorities of our eastern neighbors are as usual There have been requests for much more than that a dozen or so days ago, on November 2 , 2023, the President of Ukraine, Vlad Zelensky, appeared at the forum of the Supreme Council of Poland with an appeal for help in the reconstruction of Ukraine after the war, in his speech he said that Ukraine needs to rebuild everything that Russia has destroyed, we need Poland to rebuild our country to be able to live in peace and security, which is important Załęski He also emphasized that Poland is one of Ukraine's most important allies in the fight against Russia He thanked Poland for the help provided to Ukraine since the beginning of the war, including accepting over 2 and 5 million refugees from Ukraine at the same time Counting on our country's support in rebuilding the war damage, may we participate in this reconstruction, and hopefully this time not for nothing, it is disturbing that some in Europe are playing Solidarity in the political theater, turning the seed into a thriller. The words of the President of Ukraine spoken at the UN about the play of some countries in the Moscow theater and the cooling of mutual relations in August were completely unnecessary and many Poles he certainly holds it against him. Especially since in terms of military support for the defending Ukrainians, Poland is at the forefront and has often given more than it really could. The undisputed leader here is, of course, the United States, whose support has so far cost almost as much as In my opinion, this is what it is heading towards, and it is increasingly coming to the attention of both warring parties to Putin, and they both know that the Chinese and the Americans want to stop the escalation of military actions, to stop military operations, to reach a ceasefire, and most importantly, the vast majority of this equipment has already reached Ukraine, it includes Patriot systems, Abrams tanks and Haars long-range artillery systems. The Polish government does not conduct regular cyclical information activities. So there is no complete information about the deliveries, but what we have provided is worth over USD 4 billion, causing To this day, we are among the six countries that have provided the Ukrainians with the most military equipment, but this amount is greatly underestimated because they often gave us equipment whose value on the market differed significantly due to its age, so the amount of even $6 to $8 billion may not be at all be greatly exaggerated because not everything was included in the official data, let's first take into account tanks, among those delivered to Kiev the T72 dominates, well known to the Russians because of the Soviet design, Poland delivered the largest number of this type of vehicles and, according to unofficial data, at least 250 versions of this type were delivered to Ukraine t72m t72 M1 and t72 m1r When it comes to tanks, Poland has no equal, no one, not even the Americans, delivered as many of them as we did, the Polish authorities also sent 10 MiG 29s and declared the transfer of, among others, the S60 anti-aircraft guns along with 70,000 missiles intended for them, among others. equipment transferred from Poland to Ukraine also included various types of small arms, including grenade launchers, mortars and, among others, carbines, lightning bolts, Stinger launchers and many others. Also, the Polish defense industry plays a huge role in rearmament. Only last year, the Ukrainian side signed a contract with Huta Stalowa Wola , the manufacturer of guns, hit scrab, contract for the construction of 56 crabs, as noted by The economist, despite the delivery of such a huge amount of equipment during the 5 months of the counteroffensive, Ukraine managed to move the front line by only 17 km, and as the dependent general stated, currently the fighting is at a stalemate and without major supplies from the West in Therefore, Poland's continued counteroffensive and even defense may be much more difficult or simply impossible at the same time. Further tranches of support from Poland to Ukraine and the entire West are in doubt. Anyway, you remember perfectly well what Prime Minister Morawiecki said that Poland is now rearming . But back to the topic, the former chief Czesław Mroczek, vice-chairman of the parliamentary defense committee, who will most likely take power with his position, emphasized that decisions on how to further specifically help Ukraine in military matters require knowing the state of its own resources. Poland should act as part of the Ramstein group to support Ukraine in supplying it with military equipment and armament, we should make efforts to increase European Union spending under the European Peace Instrument are very serious measures thanks to which, among other things, we received a refund for the armament provided to Ukraine, Mroczek said in an interview for defence24.pl Therefore, it can be assumed that we will continue to send equipment to Ukrainians, but the opposition's declaration so far shows that these will no longer be such generous supplies because we have nothing left to give. In some time, we will certainly deliver another 30 Mig 29 and other prorad sieck equipment, but with and Solomon will not pour it out, and in the face of Russia's threats, we must also be ready for potential defense. It is also worth mentioning that we do not provide only weapons, but also humanitarian and infrastructural aid. The best proof of this is the fact that Rafał Trzaskowski announced at the beginning of November that Warsaw donated a total of 60 fully functional 81 series wagons that were withdrawn from everyday use with the arrival of new trains, older Warsaw metro trains are already carrying the inhabitants of Kiev, which the mayor of Warsaw shared on his Twitter or, if you prefer, on the x platform, even despite such gestures, considering As currently what bilateral relations look like, returning to the cooperation from the beginning of the conflict may turn out to be impossible, the proof of this is, of course, the Zbożów scandal and the submission of a complaint against Poland to the world trade organization on September 18 this year, the last hot dispute is also the blockade of the Polish-Ukrainian border by truck drivers this conflict turned out to be so crucial that the European Commission is even considering starting a criminal procedure against Poland. According to reports by rmffm journalists in Brussels, Polish drivers have been blocking three border crossings with Ukraine and adjacent roads for over a week, accusing the government of passivity and helplessness in the face of the losses suffered by Polish transport companies due to the need to compete with Ukrainian carriers after the outbreak of the war between Russia and Ukraine Poles are demanding a limit on the number of permits for Ukrainian trucks to enter the European Union, which is of course not agreed to Kiev police still won't let us go so that there won't be any short-circuit between drivers and Ukrainians sometimes come across sporadic cases where a boy's window was broken somewhere, he was just driving somewhere, not exactly. During the Polish-Ukrainian talks on November 13, it was not possible to reach an agreement on this matter, the Ukrainian delegation rejected Polish demands for restoring permits for commercial transport. Poland being one one of the most important transport companies in the European Union is incurring gigantic losses in making the market available to Ukrainian carriers, so far they performed about half of the transport on the Polish-Ukrainian border, currently they are responsible for over 90%, which generates gigantic losses, especially for the inhabitants of Podkarpacie due to the failure of these talks, Polish carriers announce that from November 20 they will begin a blockade of the medical terminal, which may last until January 3, this is a huge threat to interrupting the logistic chain of Ukraine, at the same time leading to significant economic destruction, which may be intensified by the upcoming winter, and the winter beyond our eastern border is already quite severe for the beginning November, the Russians will probably decide to use this moment to further weaken Ukraine. Especially since they have collected over 800 missiles in the annexed Crimea, it is highly probable that all these missiles will be used during the Energy Terror. Ukraine announced that 800 missiles, mainly of the I-caliber caliber, have already been concentrated on the occupied Peninsula. So nothing. It's no wonder that the Kiev authorities, knowing what may happen to them this winter, are trying to improve relations with Warsaw. Włodyki also expressed warm wishes to us on the occasion of Independence Day, informing at the same time how important Polish-Ukrainian cooperation is, especially when the ground is on fire, whether these wishes were sincere. It's hard to say . relations with our neighbors are based, as I said in previous films on the principle of give give give and the number of disputes is increasing An example of which is the current situation in connection with the carriers' protests, an understandable aspect is that the independence of Ukraine It is also important for Poland, but even more important for us Poles is the independence and independence of our homeland Please let us know in the comments what what do you think about curses because I'm curious about yours Thank you for today and until the next material Hold on and keep your fingers crossed for [Music] me and|||hello and welcome to the gritty and somewhat 
undiscovered city of Łódź in central poland   we were warned against visiting Łódź 
and that's exactly why we came here   so let's go and explore this city 
and see what it has to offer let's go now the first stop on our list today is the 
Manufaktura here directly in the center of Łódź   this giant complex opened in the year of 2006 and 
before it was a textile factory now it's kind of   the center of commerce so you have a huge mall in 
there it's a center of arts as well leisure you   have loads and loads of sporting events happening 
all around here maybe even concerts every now and   then so it's a huge area of 27 hectares that 
they rebuilt um to make this great complex here   where everybody just kind of comes together now 
The Manufaktura is an incredibly unique setting and   an absolutely massive shopping mall we actually 
had a look through the shopping mall there just   the other day and there is an unlimited amount 
of things that you can do inside Manufaktura   they also have a cinema city as well which is 
absolutely fantastic you have all of the recent   released movies in there and something that we 
have noticed actually quite a bit about poland in   general is that they do love their movies there's 
a cinema in every place that we've been in so far   and they love those IMAX kind of 4k 
cinematography as well and we love that as well we   definitely want to go and check a movie out soon i 
still haven't seen top gun so that is on the list   but check this place out here there is sort of 
a man-made beach just in front of Manufaktura   obviously set up for people to come chill out and 
maybe play some ball sports as well look at this doesn't get much more unique interesting and or 
as cool as this now the mall side of manufaktura   is just absolutely massive and you actually can 
get lost here um the other day when we walked   through here i think we got lost several times and 
then somehow ended up in the food court no idea   how we got there it was not our intention but we 
ended up in the food court which is also amazing   but Manufaktura in general it offers a lot of 
stores that are very high-end such as just like   michael kors i believe gucci like these types of 
places but it also offers like low end like h&m or   maybe Pull&Bear and all of that good stuff 
so it does offer something for every wallet out   there now the opinion on Łódź is very mixed we 
have received plenty of comments about Łódź some   of them saying that woods is the detroit of poland 
we even had one comment saying to absolutely avoid   wood at all costs now that really intrigued us and 
it actually made us come and check this place out   as you know our as you can tell from a lot of our 
videos that we make here on youtube we like to go   a little bit off the beaten path as often as we 
can we don't typically stick to just the regular   tourist path there was plenty of comments as well 
on a community post that we put up where people   said that they really think Łódź is underrated 
we even put up a poll on that particular post   and it was split basically 50 50. 50 said Łódź is 
underrated and a great city and the other 50 said   it's depressing and boring so that's what we're 
here to find out is Łódź depressing or is wood an   underrated gem of poland the next stop on our list 
is Pasaż Róży or in english Rosas passage which   is a huge art art project where artists covered 
around 800 square meters of walls houses doorways   windows and all and everything around the house 
basically in little broken mirror pieces and all   of the individual mirror pieces have a different 
size so they were not broken in like squares or   something like that so that it makes it easy to 
cover basically it's just very individual broken   mirrors that have different sizes on the walls 
rosa's passage here in Łódź is fascinating and   it's fascinating for us and for me in fact because 
of the contrast that it shows between two parts of   Łódź now there's one part that is here behind 
me right now if you can see this building here   and this actual street here in general a lot 
of the buildings and a lot of the doorways   are kind of dilapidated a little bit old torn and 
have certainly seen a lot throughout history and   then you also have rosas passage and it is just 
stunningly beautiful bright creative and it shows   that really inspiring new creative side to the 
city of Łódź and there's also so many beautiful   roses and flowers that are surrounding rosa's 
passage as well such as these ones right here i'm really wondering here that in the summertime 
for example when the sun gets really really strong   and broken and those little mirror pieces if 
it gets insanely hot here in the passage itself   or if maybe like little pieces of flowers 
have been set on fire by the mirrors itself   or something like that and that would be really 
interesting to know if you know that let us know   in the comments down below rosa's passage here in 
woods is certainly one of the most unique places   that we've come across so far here in poland in 
terms of creativity and just purely showing how   creativity can uplift a certain area of a place 
such as the city of Łódź and we're gonna try and   see if we can get the drone up in the air and get 
a bird's eye view of what this place looks like by the way today it was supposed to be only 22 
degrees celsius and both of us were like okay   it's not that hot so we both 
decided to go with hoodies   and i even put on some long pants 
and let me tell you something   we both regret it we're both sweating our 
little you know what's off it's very hot right now we are on the steps of this 
magnificent looking church that is at   kind of the beginning of a very significant 
and important street here in the city of Łódź   Piotrkowska street now tell me if i'm pronouncing 
that one wrong i think i might be okay with that   but speaking of pronunciations 
this church um is called kościół Zesłania Ducha Świętego so that is a mouthful and that is something 
that i certainly have pronounced wrong let me know   down below if i completely and utterly destroyed 
it um we looked it up on google maps there is no   actual english name for this church that is 
showing on google maps but do let us know   what it translates to down below now we actually 
thought that the church was closed because all of   the doors were closed you know usually one of the 
doors in the church this is usually open for the   people to walk in but somebody just walked out of 
there very casually so i assume we can just go in   and check it out wow this church is absolutely 
stunning every single corner of it you can tell   that this building in general has gone through 
quite a lot throughout the ages you can see the   wear and tear on a lot of the walls and it is very 
beautiful it definitely has not been touched up   in quite some time and you can see a lot of the 
structures and a lot of the sort of engravings   on the walls are just magnificent and really 
really just beautiful place to be the acoustics   in here are fantastic so i'd say attending 
a mass in here would be amazing just with   the priest's voice echoing around this building 
it is a very tall building so ceiling kind of   carries up all the way around two or three floors 
it is quite a tall if you can see all the way up   and we are the only ones in this church right now 
which is quite an eerie feeling but it is very   beautiful and the lighting that's coming in those 
stunning church windows just gives it a really   sort of surreal and kind of cinematic feel as 
we're walking around this beautiful church now we   are currently on Ulica Piotrkowska and this is 
the one of the main tourist attractions of Łódź   because it is one of the longest commercially 
used streets in all of europe this street   here is 4.2 kilometers long there's nearly no 
traffic you obviously have a lot of cyclists   and every now and then you do see a car for 
deliveries i suppose for the shops but it's   predominantly for pedestrians and cyclists and all 
along the street and 4.2 kilometers you just have   restaurants and cafes and clothing shops and 
places where you can buy books all of that   good stuff on a total of 4.2 kilometers which is 
absolutely amazing and i do think if you ever come   to Łódź you should check out the street and walk 
the entire distance the city of Łódź has a very   detailed and decorated history in the textile and 
manufacturing industry and you can certainly see   that in a lot of the buildings as you were walking 
down the main street of Piotrkowska Piotrkowska   street even though it is a main tourist attraction 
or one of the main tourist attractions of Łódź   and it brings a lot of people you can see that 
it's absolutely bustling and there's plenty of   people and cafes and restaurants etc and the vibe 
here is really laid back but you do see remnants   and leftovers of the industrial industry and of 
the history of the city of Łódź and then you   also see the comparison to that where there's new 
buildings new businesses entrepreneurial different   setups sort of hipster cafes tattoo parlors all of 
these sorts of things are kind of integrating into   the old industrial chic of the city and it really 
creates a very unique and tasteful vibe to Łódź i think if you wanted to you could really spend 
all day here on Ulica Piotrkowska and what i   think is really really interesting is that you 
have these small little alleyways and it's like   every like kind of second or third house that you 
can go through and then on the other side you have   a lot more shops so like it's really interesting 
to just walk through all of the alleyways and kind   of see what's on the other side because i just saw 
one where there was kind of like a hidden cafe or   maybe like hidden restaurants and all of that good 
stuff so i think it would be really interesting   to just spend an entire day just basically 
experiencing and investigating the little   alleyways now for a city that so many people like 
to talk trash about i'm seeing an awful lot of   construction sites and plenty and plenty of money 
is going in and being invested into this city   to expand it and you can see it right now 
here on Piotrkowska street this place is   absolutely thriving there's plenty of very new 
looking restaurants plenty of beautiful cafes   and you can certainly see plenty of money in the 
area we saw quite a lot of new cars new bmw's etc   and a lot of the apartment buildings and blocks 
around here appear to be quite fancy as well so   Łódź it's really not that bad it's actually quite 
beautiful from what we can see so far certain   areas in the city of woods gives you that really 
old-school type of as we said earlier industrial   style vibe but then you come to somewhere 
such as OFF Piotrkowska  it is basically a totally newly placed tons 
of different food stalls creative atmosphere   loads of sort of undiscovered underground new 
brands locals that are selling their own recipes   stuff like that and it is absolutely astonishing 
to see the vibe here is just so much younger you   see a lot more young people hanging out around 
this particular area and it's a really really cool   place and it seems like a nice place to come pop 
open a beer on a beautiful sunny day such as today   lay out on some of these loungers and just take 
in the nice atmosphere in the city of Łódź now   OFF Piotrkowska this general area here is a space 
that is used for various purposes so you do have   a lot of restaurants and bars but you also have 
loads of small kind of alternative shops where you   can get handcrafted goods and street food as well 
lots of street food stands but this general area   here was used as a cotton mill production factory 
up until 1990 so you still get kind of the vibe of   a kind of a cotton mill type of place so like 
a factory feeling like with the red brick   walls as well and the big 
windows with the with the metal   in front of it but it is made in a very 
very nice way where everything kind of seems   very alternative and just not as the rest of the 
city so this is a very special place to come to so we just had a little bit of a pit stop 
here at galeria Łódź or galeria Łódźka   another shopping mall that you definitely should 
check out if you do get the time and if you are   in the vicinity of wood in central poland it is 
one of the many shopping malls that you can find   we have actually just in this video been to three 
different malls the first one was Manufaktura   then we went to off Piotrkowska and then you 
have Galeria Łódźka and we basically went in   we went to like a polish buffet and there 
was plenty of different things that you   could find there i went for like potato 
pancakes some really good green beans   an amazing sauce and then i had like a kotlett 
as well and i picked up a glass of beer just to   something that's a little bit on the refreshing 
side poland has some really fantastic beers   we have a video from zakopane where we did a 
food and beer tour and i got to sample some great   polish beer and ever since then i have really 
just loved the beer in poland and i actually got a   just a bottle of lech beer with that meal and it 
is a fantastic place to go if you are looking for   some good tasty cheap polish food in that zakopane 
video we actually got a little bit drunk i think   maybe a little bit too drunk to film a youtube 
video but we did it anyway so we got through it   but i what i wanted to add is that even though 
it is a mall food and it is a buffet type of food   it is really really tasty and very affordable as 
well so i think i got like a schnitzel as well and   some of these potato pancakes with some spinach 
and some sauce and i think for the both of us   we paid something like 15 euro i want to say yeah 
something like that somewhere between 12 and 15.   yeah um fantastic food great little pit stop 
and we are on our way now to the i think it's   going to be possibly the final destination great 
movie by the way but we are on our way to the last   destination oh my god in this video yeah woods if 
you can't tell already it's a fantastic city very   underrated don't believe all of this bs around it 
being a down and dreary and gray there are parts   of it that are like that don't get us wrong the 
place where we're staying outside of the center   it does look a little bit beaten but we're off 
to check another very cool part of the city   for sure let's do this now we are currently 
taking a walk through the post-industrial area   of Fabryczna and this is where you will find 
the 19th century alexander navski cathedral   as well as a stunning area which we are on our 
way to we popped it into google maps and hopefully   we will be there soon it's called i'm gonna 
absolutely destroy this name Księży Młyn
 red brick   post-industrial chic buildings very incredibly 
beautiful and we are hoping fingers crossed   that we will get to come in explore this trendy 
little area that has been recommended to us so   many times by you guys down in the comments 
and on instagram as well actually and   wow we have just stumbled across the sign that 
is signaling the entrance to the area itself   i would just wanted to give it a shot 
at pronouncing it as well i believe it's because the ż is kind of like the 
żapka that so i kind of feel like it's anyway it kind of looks like it is the end stop of 
a train here and so as you can see here you have   all of the train tracks and then 
you have the beautiful sign for the   Księży Młyn area now this area here in english 
priests mill by the way was built since   the 1824 i believe if i read that correctly and 
remember that correctly but now it is more of a   mixed development type of area so like you 
have loads of housing estates in this area   restaurants cafes offices so everything that 
Łódź possibly could meet you can find here   in this area but all of this used to be everything 
surrounding textiles so loads and loads of   cotton spinning factories for example or other 
textile type of factories that could just play   into the industry that Łódź kind of occupated 
in the 1800s walking through this area it's just   absolutely beautiful all these red brick houses 
there's just something very special about   when all of the places in one small area just look 
identical it just kind of has this weird strange   cinematic vibe to it where it just it's 
so photogenic and we didn't i personally   didn't think that people were actually living in 
these buildings and then we just saw some people   standing outside having a cigarette in what is 
their front garden which is this beautiful walkway   um big open green space in front of their house 
as well and this whole area just as naomi was   briefly saying there you've got restaurants 
and everything that you could need and   the setting is just out of this world 
it's just so post-industrial sort of new   vibe to it as well because there's so much 
creativeness going on and there's plenty of sort   of hipster style cafes there's a Delikatesy 
place just that i'm looking at right now 24 hours   store where you can get everything you need 
alcohol-wise food-wise anything you could want   this place is really cool and it's definitely 
added to your list as soon as you can if you   are planning on visiting the city of Łódź now 
as luke was saying all of these red brick   houses certainly feel like you just stepped into 
like a movie set or something and all of a sudden   you are like part of a movie that takes place 
somewhere in the 1850s or something like that   and but i personally really really feel like all 
of these red brick houses are kind of like an   empty canvas and it gives you it gives your own 
creativity enough space to kind of flourish like   it really feels like you want to get creative 
as soon as you touch this area alright so to be   100% honest with you guys when we came to Łódź 
for the first time meaning just a few days ago   i had the impression that around 50 of people 
have about Łódź and i genuinely thought that it   was boring gray kind of depressing there wasn't 
really much to do i was walking around Łódź   with naomi and looking around and being like 
why would someone come here but now after   today after exploring around after truly immersing 
ourselves into the city of Łódź i can really see   the other side of the coin and i can see that 
wood is absolutely an underrated gem of a city   and it's somewhere actually that i would say that 
you need to visit as soon as you possibly can   a lot of these cities such as Kraków Gdansk 
all of this type of stuff they always   make the same lists and people year after 
year visit poland then they go to the tatras   they go to morskie oko we went to morskie oko 
we went to the tatras zakopane kraków check   check check they check off all of these amazing 
places and all of those places are absolutely   must visit destinations we we don't deny that but 
they leave places like Łódź places like katowice   and plenty of other amazing parts of poland just 
seemingly drop off of people's lists and that's   why we came here to this city and to be honest 
my first impression is you're either gonna love   this place or you're going to absolutely hate this 
place and for me right now i am somewhere leaning   towards loving it what do you think i absolutely 
agree with this i do think in the beginning we   had a little bit of a negative impression 
of Łódź as well because kind of the first   i want to say four days it was just raining so 
like it was really gray and we were kind of just   sitting in our airbnb not really knowing what to 
do couldn't go outside we were just seeing this   gray image outside of our window um we're also not 
staying in the best area so we have to add that   but i do think Łódź overall definitely is a 
very unique place and it's very different like   it feels different to the rest of poland as well 
in a very unique way so i think you will either   going you you're either going to resonate with 
the city or you won't but i do agree with luke   there i do think it's i resonate more towards the 
positive i do think Łódź is definitely worth   visiting maybe not for two or three weeks but 
definitely for like a weekend trip or like four   days or something like that i think that would be 
enough for Łódź but you should put it on your list   just to kind of see this beautiful and very very 
unique part of earth but i think that is it from   us today you guys we are going to order another 
bolt now in order to get home because we walked   so far today that we don't want to walk all 
the way back or find the next train i'd say no   yeah believe it or not a Łódź i think is 
the third largest city in poland you wouldn't   actually believe that but as we walked around 
today we walked a considerable amount i think   easily covered like 10 or 12 kilometers today 
alone and we still haven't even seen like a   third of the city itself um so so many of you 
keep telling us in the comments and you haven't   even seen the great part of the city it's like 
yeah but we already walked 20 kilometers yeah   poland is a big place yeah but um we've been 
using bolt and some of you guys that might   have watched our Bielsko-Biała series we used 
bolts to get to some places there so we're   going to be using one now to get back home to our 
accommodation definitely guys come and check Łódź   out as soon as you can my name is luke my name 
is naomi we are the two mad explorers and this   is your daily reminder to keep exploring see you 
guys in the next video thanks for watching ciao thanks very much for watching this video we just 
launched our community our channel memberships   here on youtube so if you want to be part 
of this community make sure to check out   the benefits and perks down below all 
of this is only possible because of   you guys and with your support we will 
be able to keep going for a lot longer|||These were the final words that were captured
on the Cockpit Voice Recording on board LOT Polish Airlines Flight 5055. Translated from Polish into English this reads... “Goodnight, goodbye. Bye, we are dying”. These haunting final words came at the very
end of a struggle to save the lives of 183. The case Flight 5055 is one where a lot of
things went wrong. On May 9th, 1987, this large passenger plane
fell out of the sky following a devastating catastrophic failure within the plane’s
engines. What followed was a desperate struggle from
the pilots to save the plane from crashing. Ultimately this resulted in the deadliest
air disaster in Poland’s history. But it’s how it got to this point is what
we need to examine further. Because hidden away beneath this surface of
this plane’s skin, is certain type of failure that occurred at multiple levels, mechanical
and financial. The date was May 9th, 1987. At Warsaw in Poland a large passenger plane
was preparing for a long flight to the United States that morning. That day was a Saturday, and it was a warm
sunny clear day. The perfect day to go flying. LOT Flight 5055 was the chartered flight from
Warsaw to San Francisco via New York. A total of 172 passengers would be taking
the flight that day. LOT Polish Airlines in the 1970s had launched
their first transatlantic flights connecting Poland with the United States. At that time during the cold war and under
the Soviet sphere of influence, LOT didn’t much choice in sourcing a long range airliner,
the plane they ended up with was the Ilyushin iL62. When the Il62 first took to the skies in the
early 1960s it was actually for a time the largest passenger plane around. It has four rear mounted engines giving it
a rather distinctive look. For air carriers in Eastern Europe and beyond,
the iL-62 was the answer for long range operations. Its also a plane that LOT has had some history
with. In 1980 Flight 007, one of their iL62s crashed
nearby to the airport here in Warsaw killing 87 people. Following an investigation into that accident
revealing the cause to be linked to manufacturing and design defects in the aircraft’s engines,
the airline sought to modernize the iL62 fleet by replacing them with the newer iL62M. The updated version of the plane that first
started flying in 1974 featured a number of improvements to the aircraft, including a
redesigned flight deck. Modifications to the wings were also made,
introducing a newer spoiler system and increased fuel capacity. Above all the biggest change to this plane
was different engines. The Soloviev D-30 engines would find their
way onto a number of the most popular planes ever to come out of the Soviet Union, including
the massive Ilyushin IL76 and the ever popular Tupolev 154. The engines being the source of disaster in
the 1980 incident, LOT replaced all of their older IL62s with these newer models. The story and the specific details about the
disaster of LOT Flight 007 is best saved for another day. Re-directing our attention back to Warsaw
in 1987, this particular aircraft was built in 1983 so it was a fairly new plane at the
time. Taking command of the large plane that day
was 59-year-old Captain Zygmunt Pawlaczyk. That day was supposed to be a day off for
the captain but he stepped in to cover another Captain. He was an exceptionally experienced with nearly
20,000 total flight hours to his name. He had spent over 10 years in the cockpit
of the IL62 by the time of the accident. Sat in the right seat was the much younger
44-year-old First Officer Leopold Karcher. Now these old Soviet Airliners typically required
up to five people to fly. In this case there were 6 men in the cockpit. Also on the flight deck was a Flight Engineer,
43-year-old Wojciech Kłossek 47-year-old Lesław Łykowski was sat in the navigators
position. Handling the radios was 43-year-old Leszek
Bogdan. And finally, the last member of crew was in
an observation role. 53-year-old Ryszard Chmielewski
With a total of 11 crew members on board the flight’s total occupants was brought to
183. Now with setting up the scene here when looking
into this Disaster, the conversation certainly can’t miss the extraordinary stroke of luck
that was given to one passenger who was supposed to be on the flight. One Janina Szulc-Tomaszewska was a New Jersey
resident and was travelling home after visiting family in Poland. During her trip she purchased an expensive
mink coat. In Warsaw airport, she didn’t know that
she needed to declare the item. Now Flight 5055 was a sold out flight, every
seat was booked but there was an additional overbooked passenger let’s just say, who
happened to be acquainted with a Customs Officer in Warsaw airport. This Customs Officer, basically decided to
do this individual a solid and free up a seat for them. Janina Szulc-Tomaszewska was singled out by
the customs officer as she didn’t declare this expensive fur. She missed the flight because of it. Though she argued with airport personnel in
Warsaw, she didn’t know it at the time but her failure to file the appropriate documents
and declare her item had just saved her life. At 10:07 in the morning on May 9th, 1987,
Flight 5055 pushed back from the gate in Warsaw. The airport layout in Warsaw has not changed
much since 1987. Flight 5055 was taxied down to the South side
of the airport for a northerly departure from Runway 33. Now this is a case we actually have an Air
Traffic Control Recording for. What you are about to hear are the actual
words that were exchanged between the plane and the control tower that morning. Using this recording we can gain a further
understand as to how the following events unfolded. -atc recording
After take-off, the pilots were given a heading from the departure controller. Heading 290. Additionally, the controllers cleared the
flight to climb up to 28,000 feet, flight level 280. As the plane climbed there was some conflict
of airspace between the plane and nearby military airspace. When Flight 5055 first accepted the departure
clearances on the ground, among the conditions in the clearance was to reach 18,000 feet
before reaching a certain waypoint as the plane flew out Northwest of Warsaw. It turned out in this case that they were
below this threshold which may have posed a risk of a midair collision as training exercises
were being conducted that day and military and civilian radio communications were segregated. This exchange was recorded... -atc recording – airspace conflict
As a result of this exchange, the pilots sought to increase their climb rate and thus increased
the throttles to maximum power. The throttle setting would stay at this higher
setting for around 9 minutes. Soon the Departure controller handed them
off to another frequency and said goodbye. -atc recording
-pause The 
recording here on this controllers end is extremely muffled, I have done my best here
to raise the frequencies of this Polish controller’s vocals. The new controller clears the flight to a
higher altitude up to 31,000 feet. -atc recording
The  time was 10:40. LOT Polish Airlines Flight 5055 was passing
over the town of Grudziądz, about 110 miles Northwest of Warsaw, about 50 miles south
of Gdansk. They reported an altitude of 26 and a half
thousand feet as they continued their further climb up to 31,000. In the cabin, the flight attendants were preparing
their service for the passengers. Hanna Chęcińska was one of the five flight
attendants on the flight. She was positioned in the very rear of the
plane, in that space that is between the two sets of engines. Disaster would strike the plane very soon,
just as passengers began settling into the The following segment of the ATC recording
will give us a window into the moment catastrophe struck the plane, let’s play out this section
of the recording before going into detail on what exactly happened here. -atc recording
Now that was the ATC recording, we also have the cockpit voice recording transcript from
the moment the failure occurred. From the ATC recording and the CVR transcript,
what we have learnt is that, from the pilot’s perspective, two of the plane’s four engines,
the two on the left side had malfunctioned, failed, at that moment the pilots really had
no idea into the specifics. They knew however that there was an explosion,
an explosive decompression and a suspected fire. As you heard the controller suspected a collision
of some kind, the pilots weren’t sure. Now this is the crux of the situation, the
key question to answer. What happened to these engines, well more
specifically the issue was actually just with one engine. What the pilots didn’t know was that an
uncontained engine failure had just occurred with the number 2 engine. That is on the Il62 the inner engine on the
left side. Now an uncontained engine failure could occur
for any one of a multitude of reasons, the history of aviation history is littered with
such events. But to distinguish it from a contained engine
failure, the uncontained scenario involves parts of the engine’s internals being ejected
outside of the engine housing. This is what happened on this flight, and
it can’t really be overstated just how catastrophic this failure was for reasons we’ll get into
soon. But first lets unpack the details of this
specific case of an Uncontained engine failure. In this case, the low pressure engine shaft
inside engine number 2, had succumbed to excessive heat damage. This led to a total failure and disintegration
of the shaft and the engine internals as a whole. The next question is how this heat was generated
in the first place. For that we have to understand what this thing
is. This is a roller bearing. These are found in all types of engines you
can even find them in the engine of your car. They can also be found inside of airplane
engines; the number of these bearings varies on the engine model. They are used to give support and bear loads
which can minimize friction within an engine. The roller bearings on the Soloviev D30 engines
are supposed to be fitted with a total of 26 of these cylindrical individual roller
parts to make up the larger component. Now we are only interested in one of the roller
bearings. and turbines. What was later determined by investigators
when looking through the wreckage of the plane was that this bearing in addition to the others
related to engine number two were fitted with only half of the necessary rolling parts. 13 as apposed to the normal 26. LOT Polish Airlines knew about this but allowed
the engine to go into service as there was a delay on the shipment of newer bearings
and they needed the engine. It was revealed many years after the Iron
Curtain fell, that Lot was known to have employed cost cutting practices in the operation of
their planes, especially when it came to their engines. Something that people have linked to this
disaster in the years since. Furthermore, an additional modification in
the form of multiple drilled holes into the critical bearing at fault was supposed to
be a method to supply lubrication to the bearing. Instead it acted as more of a point of weakness
and fatigue. This enabled an environment where the engine
shaft was experiencing temperatures in excess of 1000 degrees Celsius. The component that should have helped support
the shaft and reduce friction had deteriorated the engine shaft to such a poor condition
that on that fateful day, it broke. This was following the 9 minute period of
maximum applied thrust demanded from the pilots to allow them to climb faster. This is how the uncontained engine failure
occurred. At the onset of the failure, the pilots immediately
experienced the human effects of decompression. Just when the pilots were settling into their
long flight, they suddenly received warnings indicating an engine fire; the number one
and two engines were down. The explosive force of the failure had sent
debris from the failed engine through into the neighboring number one engine. As a result the two left side engines were
basically destroyed in this moment. Additionally, vital hydraulic flight control
lines were severed in the process. Other debris fractured the skin of the aircraft
and teared a hole at the rear of the fuselage, depressurizing the cabin. Numerous electrical failures occurred across
the plane including the failure of the fire detection system in the lower cargo deck where
a fire began to burn. It was at that moment of failure that Flight
Attendant Hanna Chęcińska positioned in the space between the engines was killed,
she was the first fatality. According to Polish sources, during the crisis
that followed about four minutes before the crash a flight attendant was reported to have
went on record on the cockpit voice recording to say they couldn’t find her. Hanna from that moment on was missing. Her body was never found at the eventual crash
site which meant her fate could have been one of two possibilities. One she was ejected from the plane following
the decompression. Or two, she was either stuck in the back of
the plane and burned in the fire. Or possibly was injured or killed directly
from debris from the faulting engine. Either way her remains were never recovered
or were unrecognizable at the scene of disaster... Captain Pawlaczyk with his 20,000 flight hours,
now needed to put his knowledge and experience of flying to work. He began to turn the plane around for a return
to Warsaw. After swiftly identifying the decompression,
he began to descend to a lower altitude so himself, his crew and passengers could safely
breath. During the turn to the right the captain discovered
that this situation was worse than he thought, as if this couldn’t get any worse. The flight controls were rather unresponsive. The rudder and the elevators weren’t working. They did have control of the ailerons and
could still steer the plane where it needed to go, and they did have some pitch control
by use of trim. But this wasn’t enough to effectively manipulate
the pitch with such a heavy plane on just two engine. Flight 5055 would now continue to descend
against the pilot’s will. Additionally we should note that four minutes
after the crisis began, the indicated engine fire was extinguished. The Il62 was equipped with an automated engine
fire extinguishing system. But there were still fires in other parts
of the plane that would continue to burn and spread. The pilots had no idea of this due to the
electrical outage shutting off much of the fire detection systems. Lets continue with the recording. -atc recording
They needed to jettison fuel to prevent an overweight landing. Also, the reason why the pilots elected Warsaw
to be the return airport as opposed to the nearer Gdansk, this was likely to give them
a bit of time to actually jettison the fuel. But there was a problem, the electrical failures
across the plane had left some connection issues between the cockpit and electrically
powered Fuel dumping system. They couldn’t dump the fuel right away. It took several minutes for the jettison system
to actually begin the dump and over 30 tons of fuel was released from the plane. 10:51. The pilots were struggling to keep control
of their aircraft. they continuously were losing altitude and
with minimal flight controls a radio call goes out to try and get them into a nearer
airport. Northwest of Warsaw is Modlin airport. At the time it was a military airfield, but
air travellers today will know this as the Warsaw airport served by Ryanair. -atc recording
The controller would spend one minute trying to contact Modlin for clearance. -atc recording
The situation onboard the stricken plane would only continue to deteriorate. The pilots were unaware of the fire that was
in the cargo hold. As mentioned earlier an electrical failure
had cut off the fire detection systems in the cargo bay. The fire continued to burn without interference. In the cabin passengers were absolutely aware
of how dire their situation was. Some passengers even took time to write notes
of goodbye that would later be found in the wreckage. At 10:53 Flight 5055 would enquire again about
the option of landing in Modlin. -atc recording
Eventually the flight received clearance to land at the Modlin base and requested that
controllers use their radar to guide them to the airport. However, the plane had descended beyond a
point where it could not be picked up on the radar of the higher altitude controllers. With radar contact lost, the crew were sent
radar information to try and locate the Modlin air field. They were once again put back in touch with
Warsaw approach where they made contact at 10:58. With each passing minute, the captain evidently
had doubts about the idea of landing here. Though it was a closer airport, the emergency
services were better quipped at Warsaw. At precisely 11:00 the pilots made the call
to fly directly to Warsaw’s main airport. -atc recording
The controller gave them a vector south of the airport, this was in preparation for landing
on Runway 33, from the south The controller offers the pilots an approach
onto runway 11. Which would mean they could fly almost directly
into the airport from their heading approaching Warsaw from the North West regardless of the
wind conditions. This would decrease the flying time and get
them on the ground sooner. Captain Pawlaczyk did have some doubts about
this and requested wind information. Upon hearing that the straight in approach
would include a 22 kilometer per hour tailwind, he elected to fly the Runway 33 approach from
the south instead, using the same runway they used to take off. The crew were rather adamant about that with
controllers. -atc recording
11:08, Flight 5055 was roughly 15 kilometers from the airport. They were being directed south of the airport. The plan was for the plane to brought in with
a left turn to line up for the runway. It is here that we reach the endgame of the
crisis. The fire that had continued to burn throughout
the plane was now indicated to the pilots has it can spready to the right side engines. It was burning and eating its way through
the remaining flight control systems. They would communicate that they were now
having difficult with turning the plane. In the final moments of the flight, as they
tried to wrestle the plane toward the airport, they’d drift off course. Visible from the ground many looked up into
the clear sky to observe the crippled plane in its final moments. -atc recording
In the final seconds of the flight, Flight 5055 would transmit their final message. The transmission gives us a small glimpse
in the chaos that had now descended in the cockpit. They’d transmit their final words as all
control was now lost. The final descent toward the ground, brought
the Ilyushin jet into the Kabaty wood just a few kilometers from the airport. -atc recording. Ending. Out of control in a nose down attitude, LOT
Polish Airlines Flight 5055 crashed into the woods. All 183 people on board the plane, were now
dead. Had the flight crew had just one to two more
minutes, they might have made it. Very quickly following the crash, first responders
had arrived only to witness the horrifying scene of plane wreckage. The crash had carved a path through the forest. Some even noticing the human remains tangled
in the trees. Some sources have speculated on the thought
process of the captain in the final seconds before the crash. In this desperate dire situation it may have
become apparent that there was no way with such little control that they could have guided
the plane to safety. Even in 1987, there were populated surrounding
the Kabaty Woods, beyond the end of the trees from where the plane was heading lays the
densely populated neighborhood of the same name. Kabaty around this time was experiencing large
population growth as people moved into newly constructed apartment blocks. It is the belief of some that Captain Pawlaczyk
using what little flight controls he had left crashed the plane into the woods on purpose
to prevent further loss to human life. The investigation that followed had to be
conducted without much help from the aircraft’s manufacturer in the Soviet Union. Ilyushin only supplied the most basic of information
and their co-operation in the investigation was limited. Polish investigators established that this
accident bore a striking resemblance to aforementioned disaster Flight 007 which occurred 7 years
previously, both disasters were the result of an Uncontained engine failure. An even earlier similar incident, the Königs
Wusterhausen Disaster of 1972 was a case of an inflight fire, albeit for different reasons,
that destroyed the flight controls leading to the deaths of 156 people. For more information consider watching our
video on that disaster. These types of uncontained engine failures
are devastating and airplane manufacturers over the years have taken great steps in preventing
these types of accidents. United Airlines Flight 232 is another case
that had many similarities to that of Lot 5055. Polish investigators forwarded their findings
to Moscow with a number of recommendations including the addition of an engine vibration
gauge on the Il62, something that was actually raised when the first crash occurred. The modernizing of the plane’s fire and
smoke detection equipment was also recommended. At that time, LOT was unable to purchase planes
from Western manufacturers such as Boeing and Airbus. Behind the iron curtain their options were
limited to Soviet planes. This changed at the end of the 1980s and the
airline eventually retired the Il62 plane in 1992. Patreon Outro
Hello everyone, thank you so much for watching. You made it to the end, of what has been to
date the longest ever episode of Disaster Breakdown, mind you that is only by a matter
of seconds as I think the Aer Lingus video is only just a little bit shorter. I do love making these longer videos and everyone
seems love them. Unfortunately I can’t make them every week
that is borderline impossible for a weekly schedule and just one person, me. However I have thought of perhaps changing
the upload schedule so I can do these longer videos on the regular but only upload as and
when their completed. It’s something I’m thinking about, so
we’ll wait and see what happens. Anyway I would love to take a moment to thank
my amazing Patrons over on Patreon for their generosity towards the channel. Their names are scrolling on the screen right
now, so if you see your name here, big thanks big thanks. Shoutouts this week go to Allie.nr and It’sGiants
who actually pledged at the highest tier, honestly what a legend. Thank you so very much. If you yourself would like to support the
channel further, you can join the Disaster Breakdown Patreon from just £1 per month
and the link to that will be in the pinned comment below. All patrons get early access to all new content,
two days before it goes out publicly on YouTube. So that is it from me this week, I’m going
to shut up now. If you do want to continue hearing my voice
you can always check out a couple of the videos that should be on the screen right now. That being said, thanks for watching and I’ll
see you next week. Goodbye!|||when you say you're going to do something do it boom josh luja what's up people hola vigozad here welcome to another episode i see all these youtubers making videos about what not to do in poland don't make these mistakes in poland i'm actually happy that they're making those videos because at the end of the day what we want is to showcase poland and to make sure that more people out there can see the beautiful country that poland is and the great people the polish people are but when i think about the things that you should not do in poland i think we need to go deeper so come with me and let's see what are the real things that you should not do in poland if there's one thing that you're going to avoid doing on this list this is the one don't refuse a bad chess offering polish people are very well known for their hospitality they are incredible hosts they're welcoming and they love to share their things with people especially things that have been crafted and a lot of time has been put into it food is a very big one and this traces back to the times of war of course all this has been extremely well documented but if you didn't know back during war times it would be weeks before people would have any option whatsoever at the grocery store unlike today you were not choosing between a bread with seven seeds baked in a mediterranean stone oven or the gluten-free loaf designed in america but assembled in vietnam only sold in american spencers to the first 100 people and even with this scarcity polish people were splitting in half whatever little they had to share with whoever might need it a great example of this is during polish vigilia there's always an extra space at the table for an unexpected visitor that might need some shelter it is a generation thing polish grandmas although a little old and maybe a little tired will always find strength and time to show love and usually they do that by giving you things especially food you don't need fish oh you're on a diet you're vegan you're vegan that's a lot of butter [Music] don't worry about being nice be consistent be reliable depending where you're traveling to and where you're from this may vary but it's quite a general rule that whenever you go to a place it pays off to be polite to be cheerful to be nice it's not the polish people don't like it when you're nice but that concept is a little bit different when you're in poland i myself i'm very guilty of that i can smile all day long and i can compliment people left and right but i'm still going to get long faces and awkward stares if i don't comply with the single most important rule in a relationship with a polish person and that is to be consistent and to be reliable if you say you're going to do something do it if you said you're going to be there at three don't show up at four and if you committed to helping a friend that you were just trying to be nice don't do it or you lose all respect of polish people honestly speaking some of the things they say to you can come off as pretty damn rude if you don't know the reason why they do it then you might feel a little bit like hey cuba can you help me put together furniture this weekend nope i don't have time cold but you see it's not that they're really rude is that they don't want to commit to something that they might not keep their word on they really don't want to come off as unreliable same thing goes with consistency if you say you don't like something don't be changing your mind because people will take your word for it [Music] stop all that fairy tale bull and let's complain together if there's one thing the polish people love more than vodka and pierrot is to complain but here's the thing there's an art form to complaining in poland there are certain rules that you have to adhere to there's nothing more irritating to a pole than someone that comes off as overly happy and just overall fake your friend had a terrible day a job we're in the middle of the pandemic their son is sick the last thing you should say to them is benja dobje you throw yes no vegeta oh don't even try instead share how you also had a shitty day and he will feel understood polish people value community so they rejoice on the feeling that they belong to a bigger picture so the infamous polish complaining it's nothing more than them looking for a connection with others so next time you hear someone grumble show some camaraderie and let them know how you're also going through something similar as counterproductive as this might sound i promise you in the end they will give you a big smile if you want to go to the next level with polish people don't just go for the words go for the body language it is true that polish language is one of the hardest languages to learn so when a foreigner learns a couple of words you'll get a few surprise faces and even a couple paddings in the back although let's face it polish people don't touch so much and having said that we're in the year 2020 we are in the times of millennials of gen zed and you get more and more youtube videos showcasing poland the wonders that you can find in this beautiful country which means it's not uncommon to find some foreigner learning to say david dania or jen kuya but for the life of me learned that it's not pierogis it's pierrogi it's already in plural form there are some serious unique body language cues that if you master them polish people will hand you the keys to the city number one the polish shoulder shrug never attack attack number two the circle of trust polish people have what i call a circle of trust it's an imaginary ring that goes all the way around them where they feel uncomfortable whatever is close to this imaginary ring let's say this is a person if that person comes inside my ring that is a no-no and number three voice volume and polite interruption for me to explain voice volume and polite interruption i'm gonna need carolina's help okay guys so like i said i need her help to clarify this particular polish body language trait we're talking about volume of voice and what i call polite interruption okay so for example polish people speak loud not as dominican we yell but you guys are for example in a public transportation oh yeah and you're there on the phone hello mama yeah exactly why does that happen why does it happen when they were loud i don't think anyone has the answer to this question okay so for example if foreigner that is going to start incorporating some of that polishness what should i do like for example to me it's very hard to speak when people are listening to me so i'm like i'll call you later i think it's more important that in a group that you learn to deal with the interruption interruption that takes us to the second part which is polite interruption polish people interrupt i love how they called it each other i call it polite because they don't mean you know you guys don't mean to interrupt people as in like rule like shut up it's more like we are speaking in a group of people here and all of a sudden right yeah interjection so like what i'm doing now to you there you go so learn that one the final thing is think like a pole not like a tourist it's so common to hear tourists say poland is so cheap everything is so affordable the food is delicious what an amazing nature and all of that is true but polish people know this and this is my particular opinion and they're not gonna say anything because they are very humble people but there's a lot more to being polish there's a lot more to poland and frankly there's a lot more things that probably you should not do in poland than what i can cover in one video but if you want to get closer to the beautiful group of human beings that polish people are i think it's important you start thinking like a pole when you go over to visit get off the beaten path explore the villages talk to the local people they love meeting foreigners because at the end of the day long gone are the days where societies remain closed polish people want to explore the world polish people want the world to explore them so come on over and enjoy the pleasures of poland boom that's all guys that's the end of the episode i hope you enjoyed it i'm going to ask you to share this with a friend it doesn't matter if it's polish doesn't matter where they're from and to be honest with you if you're a pole cut me a break man i'm one of you|||Radio that makes you think this is the Brian kilmeade show. >> They welcome back everyone is my privilege to have in studio the president of Poland Andrzej duda, president of the Republican pollens really since 2014, isn't it remarkable job in stepped up big time when this Ukraine war started his country has taken in about a million Ukrainians Mister president welcome to the show. But this of this new term have been out of that thought I mean this is great you and all our listeners and viewers. >> How is Poland. >> Been able to absorb the million Ukrainians and what has been the greatest challenge for your country as after Russia's invasion. >> Double a little said that was a really hard said nobody has really have to encourage pulse my compatriots to welcome refugees from a crane into their homes as we call them guests in Poland. Kiddos as out when Russia attacked Ukraine launching a full-scale attack as we put it on the 24th of February 2022 to still go. Well indeed a huge flight of refugees says started to move towards the Polish border we opened up our border immediately trying to let as many people get through as possible to make it available for the biggest possible number of people to flee from the area switched Russia was attacking because right from the start of that war, it's Russia has been personally attacking someone neighborhoods is not only military targets right from the start they carried out brutal miss I'll ever rates of fake neighborhoods in big grand citizen her cave in Kiev and in other places also close to the Polish border in Novi Finn let's go back a bull got a couple of months so there are a lot of such attacks and people are fleeing just like at indeed they were well Camden police homes down and it is just an anonymous said people whom they have never known took them. Polls went to the border to those speed all home they invited them and supported them that was just at reflects of the heart so to say we know simply what it means that somebody is suffering one summed it talked, especially by Russians unfortunately, this is a part of our history, a big part of our history and Opening of the heart's was just needed was just a reflex it was pretty amazing to see. You are also the first nation to give the Ukrainians fighter jets. >> And they need more fighter jets don't they. >> Mitch because I guess and we have the transfer to Ukraine as night Yang says size big parts of our moments exist forced winds the biggest existence of course is coming from the United States and being neighbors to grand never met a grateful for that to the U.S. authorities for that help for that support to Ukraine without this support Ukraine would not survive and there's no doubt about that they wouldn't be able to defend themselves. It is not only about and the bravery off granite soldiers which is wonderful that it is also a matter of having things to find a way it wasn't a fight with so right from the start we are also sending armaments to Ukraine the one rent soldiers were able to use right away that was important at this at the outset they have no experience whatsoever with a Western American military Jenna quick mental French equipment box and they were very good using apps so it Iraq Russian equipment that is why we sent right away Nick, 29 jets that would put them at the disposal of Ukrainian and soldiers and they had the pilots were able to fly those planes right away we sent more than 300 tanks to Ukraine mainly these were. The post-soviet era tanks but we modernize them in Poland and they had to add strength ours and also communication systems were high quality wins and they were well acquainted and ready to fight week sent more than 300 such tax loss also leopard tanks later on and produced by Germany we organized black at 10 coalition or an arm a collision as we call it that way. Also and talk to everybody and convinced everyone upon the request of Ukraine to send modern tanks to rain, the tanks weight check where I'm at tanks of the 21st century. And indeed we were implementing the Powell the Times of the longer among the 3 states will actually be the biggest military assistance to Ukraine is that the U.S. and that was a huge effort as we are doing that also in order to strengthen Polish security because we know that Russian imperialism has to be stopped to us this is of key importance to make sure that you Grant can defend itself. So that Russians are not able to can carry a crane said that they did not to say to crane Ukraine has to defend itself and I make an appeal to everyone to support Ukraine because the promise of international law has to be reinstated and you notice that to happen Russian troops have to be driven out from the Greenland Ukraine has to recover control of its internationally recognized borders, so we've given 70 billion dollars. But everything we give seems late. Hi Mars late Patriot 15 trainings late. >> The cluster bombs late the javelin missiles late, the tanks 31 not one has arrived. How hard has it been on the Ukrainians because it seems like we are always late. So that she can publish his book said person from a staff assistance is needed and it's positive that the assistance is being given I'm always saying well we need to appreciate that because without a military support, especially with modern equipment. Grant would not be able to defend itself. >> The problem that the grants are facing is not only the so-called military techniques or technology simply said weapons. There's also another thing, Russia simply is the Russians on much more numerous than Ukrainians what are you saying at does not care for the life of his soldiers, his hands, how's and of soldiers to die as a matter of fact in many cases, Russians are suffering huge losses but he's setting asked surgeries coming from the Far east of Russia and these are not soldiers from Moscow and they're not reserve a sour conscripts from some Petersburg from big cities and where they're influential athletes where that could be Arab alley another part of the society where the world will be able to mothers of fallen soldiers, protesting taking soldiers from and you are away areas of Russia, not Russians they're coming from a different nations. Nations who leave in Russian and those soldiers and are being killed and mosque simply they're actually outnumbering Ukrainians with the sheer number this is the difference between 40 million for aliens and whenever you're ready really interesting we or late on this. >> And it may it makes it harder in America. For us to support the war were late on getting the stuff they need yet the numbers are high in terms of what we already given have you express said the president Biden that you know they need F fifteens they need more tanks, 31 is not enough for the job tonight though. >> Yesterday I said to President Biden was because we had an opportunity to see each other during a reception. Given here in New York by this president on the occasion of the UN General Assembly actual traditionally I said I asked for a match to provide further support to Ukraine to instagram because that is of key importance to stop Russian imperialism to provide a huge war because I'm convinced that if Russian imperialism is not Then Russia, sooner or later with its actions will lead to a great war and then unfortunately as we have seen in history and the history, the First World War the Second World War in order to bring about peace in Europe somehow the United States again we'll have to get involved by deploying its soldiers that is why original making a pill to help Ukraine right now of Iran is able to defend itself before this conflicts pills over a motion today just wait can be kept off Russian imperialism simply by forcing Russians to withdraw and by doing that by punishing the imperialist ambitions. view share the move by the new book which Vladimir putin is demonstrating. This is a huge opportunity today to keep the peace in the world and I appeal to everyone but you and I just I also asked president Biden I do the same stuff because it to use this opportunity just to this opportunity is being used recess. We grew supporting Ukraine we're starting an instagram to help Ukraine and to defend their homeland. So. >> You I understand spending even more. On your defense. In any other nation in NATO pretty per capita for EU GDP, not only you do in 2% you're going to get up to 4%. Why do the polls people a new president due in particular understand the need to hit the threshold of 2 and double it where other nations like Germany, France, hungry and others don't even get close to that in fact only 9 nations are hitting their 2% that drives that drives. Critics of NATO crazy play people like president Trump and he's got a great point doesn't he. Yeah I'm sure the master that I was 17 years old in 1989. >> When I was like what the Iron curtain postcard was falling and when Poland was liberating itself from the darkness off communism. And the postal most simply the Soviets from the Russian from the Soviet sphere of influence he said we were successful, thanks to celebrity. Thanks to the determination. Of the Polish and also thanks to huge support from the United States and will always be grateful to add to President Ronald Reagan will recall him with a break and with great class but also our question of the Pope John Paul the second were so I've got a picture and where is run as a Reagan and the pope were talking to each other the way to a huge leaders world leaders and to get away from minister Margaret Thatcher they brought up and the fall of the air and hurting his and thanks to that we managed to liberate every sound of without light without block check in a Democratic way through protests 3 elections. That was a great great success, but we understand not too well in Poland with Russian occupation is what Russian sphere of influence stands for and today when Russia began but the idea has revived his interrogations that wants to govern just have to get its of other nations which it demonstrated in Georgia back in 2008 which has been demonstrating since 2014 Ukraine and since last year to see through full-scale operation by crashing still in neighborhoods by killing called Joseph Polish people understand full well that we have to prepare ourselves right to show that we are strong enough and hands the now some of you to spend on defense on strengthening collision forces of course we're very happy to have on our soil that us soldiers come and we are really grateful for that to the United States as a state and as a member of NATO, him know that what is of the biggest importance is to make sure that we are at risk possible. A thunder is possible as the one who cares for their own security prison due to a polling have so many questions for you, but I guess first and foremost. >> Is this a putin issue is Vladimir putin the one who really wants to expand get the Russian empire back was this a Russian government policy and he just happens to be the president is putin the problem or is Russia. The problem. To beaches a grease gun on the problem in the U.S. to a huge problem is the seas to 2 of the president of the Russian Federation Vladimir putin he is leading the state and these are his political decisions of of course a circle Hayes collaborators as well let's be open and Frank and say the following this policy the imperialist Russian the policy of aggression of Russia against the grain and maids support of a huge part of that Russian society there are no big protests in Russia games to let her put in its policy on year. >> Is sessions and your many years have been bad with drug and ashes of their being convinced that they have the right to the average other nations that they have the right to exist and there are a little skinny it back to the nation's in our part of the world in our part of the rallies that he has and he's got it has to do with a Russian aggression with the Russians lenses and they don't want to have them back and we will defend ourselves against that because would not want to have a scheme year. We have our own couch church. We have our own Caston was and we want to preserve these would not want Russia to impose its rules upon asked like they've done before with the Soviet Union coming on one and not see German and the other end and they cut Poland to pieces in you're not going to let that happen again, I'm sure of it because I'm one of the van of those a little bit about the huge number of our citizens were murdered tadpoles were shut down during the Second World War that was done by Germans by German Nazis that was also Don by Russians in cutting they killed police officers post-intelligencer dash should says several 1000 polls were murdered in a brutal way right by the Stalin regime by the Soviets set the conditions of hundreds of thousands were to depart it to your way Siberia when know what severing means a Russian Slade meant and we never want to say that the greater this capturing things like that taking Ukrainian kids and bring them into Russia. They give 4% of their GDP to NATO and they've already 3.1 Excuse me. >> 3.2 6 billion dollars. Towards fight in Ukraine and taking over >> Breaking news unique opinions. Steer it all on the Brian kilmeade show. >> This said President president do we're privileged to have the president polling Tuesday in such a remarkable job as an ally to the Americans, especially to the Ukrainians understand the Russian threat. Mister president. Give me your view on the counterinsurgency right now I know you said prior to this the Russians have really dug in and they're looking to protect the land. They stole. And but it seems as though there seems to be breakthroughs over the last few weeks and taking back small towns are they getting the the money equipment are they starting to see some penetration. But on take the offensive beginning of defense is to come to France or the candor of unsafe launched by a crane was very difficult was it to Mister the reason for that was that and what perhaps they Brennan's might not have or might have underestimated that Russians their preparations to keep the occupied areas. >> Russians built very strong line of defense they build fortifications and first and foremost they laid hundreds of square kilometers off minefields Asia and indeed they green army which was launching the country fence it was entering those mine fields and suffered huge losses that is why a couple of months ago. I personally was asked by President volodymyr Zelensky Jessica at no time was he pushed up says while on that Poland and was special vehicles and the mining vehicles position of the sun and sports as a matter of fact we were supplying such vehicles from Cohen as part of our support we're looking at every over Poland and military and it's another to be able to deploy them to a grandson as possible, so they could support that offensive activities it rains it's a part of the country and that fact, Russians who was on a date for a lot of work to be filed and that was holding back the largest ash raining in that country fans of today, he's no and some of those average by fields have been neutralized that that is going to be a concern for 10's of years after the war and because we know that's my feels are tragedies that you feel you not only has time to kind of minds to carry that today show you get that today a lot of those difficulties have been over 90 seconds left. Right now people wonder how committed Western Europe is to this. >> There's word that India is selling Russian oil back to Western Europe to get a discount. They're starting to break their own sanctions countries like Germany. You worry about countries like Germany and France who are not giving what they pledged. You think they'll start to maybe forget about this. Job so this is can move well in the first I keep calling on the assistance to Ukraine is also very consistent implementation of the sanctions policy vis-a-vis Russia, Russia has to stop to the Russian imperialism is very dangerous. >> Today this Russian he really saying is demonstrated through that brutal aggression against a greatness that is Russia is successful in Ukraine and it will probably attack and other states locked in as many years ago in 2008 when Russia invaded Georgia and polish president Lech Kaczynski. It was saying in Tbilisi I had an honor to cooperate with him back then as a young minister in his She said that you today, it's Georgia tomorrow, perhaps it will be a great and then the both say that perhaps even my country Poland predict that he said it in 2008 and unfortunately, he's words are coming true that is why we started our drank so much to support Ukraine today in our part of Europe, vice president of the Baltic states myself because we are aware that I that's and rash. It poses a real threat to that there is a Russian pair of this president|||[Music]   Choosing Poland does not surprise anyone A lot of people have got pets dogs specifically People are really nice here Someone recommended you Poland? We just Googled it.  A good history from the past  I really like Poland People is so sweet We have many advantages for a student The life is a little cheap I choose it because of the snow And would you recommend Poland to the other foreigners?  Yes, definitely! What, what, what's your question?  Hello my friends my name is Daria - Immigration lawyer from Warsaw, Poland and in today's video in the City Center of 
Warsaw I will be asking local foreigners why they   chose Poland to live here.  - What you like the most about Poland since you are here? 
Because where are you from actually which country are you? 
- I'm from Zimbabwe.
- So what surprised you in Poland actually - A lot of people have got pets dogs 
specifically - that was surprising for me I   want to share something I'll probably be like: 
"Don't be afraid to ask", you know like I know   it's shocking to be in a new country and not 
knowing where you are sometimes you need to   ask. Yes... You can use Google Translate and yeah.
- But people are helpful in general I think yeah   so this is the most important I think yes. 
- People are afraid to ask because they don't really know   umm what to expect from the people but so far 
for me it's been a wonderful experience. - Do you live here? 
- Uh, I used to live here.
- Okay, so why you chose Poland actually ?
- First of all I   choose it because of the snow because in my 
country like I don't have snow I mean I love   it but like the weather in Poland I don't like 
it like sometimes it's like windy like  Sunny like you never know the weather in Poland.
- And where are you from?
- Where you think I'm from? I'm from Mexico. I don't want to leave like 
right now. Actually today is my last day here in Poland. I don't want to leave. Actually 
I was with my friend like 10 minutes ago. I   don't know maybe I come back for University or 
something. Wawsaw I think it's   um really fun for young people. Public transport 
is really nice. There is like four lines...   In my country I have two in the capital. And 
so it's not not like really good also told   my friends that I need to bring them here because 
it's not like usually the cities are you know like Warsaw has something special. 
I don't know how to explain it 
- But like you just feel it, right? - Exactly, exactly. I know more 
Warsaw than my city like Mexico City is   I don't know I just love it.  You came for the purpose of study? Or work? Okay and where are you from?
- India. 
- Someone recommended you Poland or...? 
- No, we just Googled it. - Oh you Googled it.
- Reels also - Instagram 
- What is your impression? Are you satisfied? Yeah, yeah I chose to come here because I'm a good traveler 
I'd like to know different place and because I'm   from Brazil and the language different 
cultures and language and that's it.  It's my first time here
- And what is your impression?
- Oh it's perfect! It's a beautiful place and I can   see a good history from the past and that's 
perfect. I'm really like and I love it.  Because I wanted to try a new experience because all my 
friends are going to like Germany, USA and other   places. So, other something new.
- And how long you are here already?
- Seven months. - Oh, that's long.
- And you came here for study/work?
- Yeah, yeah, studies. 
- And where are you from? Which country?
- Kenya.
- What surprised you actually in Poland?
- The weather first, the weather yeah. I wasn't used to the cold but at least now 
I just said yeah I adjusted and you enjoy   actually polish weather or not much? 
- At the start, the winter was kinda too much, but at least now   we enter in summer, so it's gonna be better.  I live here because I have my work here   and my history is really difficult the support 
agency of the work and it's really false and   my situation here is difficult one year ago and 
right now it's okay I like Poland.   - But where are you from actually?
- I'm from Mexico
- Oh, you're from Mexico! Actually we already met one Mexican lady here So much Mexican right now. And I work in the restaurant for Mexico. I really like Poland. It's really a beautiful country   and the people is really good. It's security.
In Mexico right now is insecure you know - It was good choice to move here?
- Yes
- Okay, thank you very much thank you very much  - I'm coming here for working 
- Okay and where are you from? 
- I'm from Georgia.
Would you like to recommend   - Poland for other foreigners to live here and 
study?
- Yeah, because it's nice for me   And people is so sweet. For me 
everything okay here. We are from Ukraine One year ago we come to Warsaw because of the war in Ukraine That why we are here Warsaw - because my father was here. And therefore it was easier to get started here So I choose here to study like I'm studying here 
and I choose Poland because that one of the big   place of the Europe because the Germany, Polish 
and France is the one of the big like countries   - Also economically right?
- Economically, yeah, sure. 
In Poland we have many   advantages for a student, firstly. Secondly, um what 
else. I study here College. 
- Where are you from? I'm from Kyrgyzstan.
- And would you recommend other foreigners to move here to to leave   to study to do business to work is a good place 
according to you?
- Yeah uh yeah I give advice for   students actually who wants to really get Bachelor 
study here like for a management it's really good   choice will be. 
Me? I chose Polonia because I 
see a lot of countries in Europe and Poland have   a like a good economy and the life is a little 
cheap and I am from Ecuador and in Ecuador   the money is a dollar so the exchange of the 
dollar today a lot is more big so I choose   Polonia for for this.
- Would you recommend 
other foreigners to come to Poland?  Yes, a lot foreigners come to Poland like I have seven 
friends of Ecuador they live here so yes I can   recommend to the foreigners is a good place. Have 
a very good people only practice the English and   if we can practice not learn polish.
And you came for study purpose or work.
I come here to study but I also want to go to the university 
here and make my life here. I'm an exchange student here. 
- Okay, and where are you from? 
- From Hong Kong 
- Oh, very nice yeah.
-  I think Poland is   I don't know the price level is relatively low 
compared to other European countries and uh I   think the people are really nice here 
- And would you recommend the Poland to other foreigners?
- Yeah, yes, definitely! And you have some future plans for funds as 
well to work here or something else? Probably not, yeah. After I like finished my study 
here I'll go back to Hong Kong 
- Oh, you want to go   back to Hong Kong but International experience 
is always good right, yes? Thank you very much for sharing Have a good day! Thank you, bye.  Would you like to share some experience of yours  - What's your question? 
-Yes why you choose Poland as a place to live? 
- Okay, I've been here in Poland for   today is my two years May 5. wow it's a place of 
you know it's not expensive and that is when   the food is good and the people it's good and 
most important thing the Poland is especially   is the environment! Super clean, clean, clean, clean, 
clean and peaceful have a peace of mind to live   in Poland and especially when it comes to crime 
it's especially I live in the city here in Poland   restaurant it's no crime here I never experience 
for that. I feel safe when you   walk around 2 a.m./1 a.m. and I go home it's just I 
feel safe in Poland. That's a beautiful place Poland. - And would you like to stay 
here for a longer time.
 I don't think so, I don't know maybe  if God's allowing lots of life because life 
is here in Poland it's very beautiful and where   are you from I'm from? 
- The Philippines. 18 hours from Poland to the Philippines to just come here   - Where are you from? 
- I come from Comoros. Choosing Poland does not surprise anyone   see that in the higher education available 
in Poland and the Polish degree which is   acknowledged all over the world so choosing 
Poland it's not uh... 
- It's a good idea? 
- Yeah it's   a good idea and would you recommend Poland 
to other foreigners?
- Of course, foreigner should come here because it's country of many opportunities. Polish people are good for international students so yeah they should come. Poland is for the study base, working 
base, everything is very good here and the   people is very smiley face. I was in protests in Belarus in 2020. I I've got here International protection. It's not safe to come back to Belarus for me. I am very grateful to Poland They help me financially They help me learn language I really like the standart of life here I like Warsaw - beautiful city I have only positive emotions from Poland Thank you for watching my video! Please remember,
to leave a like below the video, subscribe to my   channel and share this video with your friends,
which are planning to move to Poland. Also, if you have some more ideas: which topic I should 
do on my future videos, also leave a comment below this video Thank you for watching!
And hope to see you next time soon [Music]  |||The man known to history as Hans Frank was
born on the 23rd of May 1900 in the town of Karlsruhe near the River Rhine in western
Germany. His father was Karl Frank, who was a lawyer
and a Protestant and his mother Magdalena was conversely a Roman Catholic. She was the daughter of a prosperous banker
and the marriage was one between two upper-middle class professional families. Magdalena and Karl eventually had three children
of whom Hans was the second. He also had an elder brother called Karl Jr.
and a younger sister named Elisabeth. When Hans was just an infant the family relocated
from the province of Baden-Wurttemberg in which Karlsruhe was located, to the Bavaria
region of southern Germany. Where they lived in the provincial capital
of Munich. It was a move that would have considerable
significance for Frank’s life as he became intimately associated with the extremist politics
of Munich in his early adult years. In his youth he attended the Maximilian Gymnasium
in Munich, a German grammar school. However, his home life was troubled. Hans’s father Karl, despite the veneer of
professional success which he displayed, was something of a misfit and he soon developed
a poor reputation for his abilities as a lawyer in Munich, as well as corrupt activity. Eventually, many years later, he was even
struck off the legal register in Bavaria after being found guilty of embezzlement. To compound matters he was a serial womaniser
and eventually Magdalena Frank left her husband and entered a relationship with a German professor
who lived in Prague. Consequently, Hans spent much of his teenage
years being shuttled back and forth between Munich and Prague. Perhaps unsurprisingly, given this peculiar
background for the 1910s, Hans grew into an insecure young man. Frank grew up at a time when Europe was already
in a state of tension, unrest which would soon boil over into war and shape the continent’s
history for decades to come. For centuries Germany had not been a single
state, but rather a collection of hundreds of small states, some large, some very small. A gradual process of absorption of the smaller
states into the large ones was completed in 1871 when a new unified German Empire was
formed. This massively destabilised the balance of
power in Europe, creating a new state in the centre of the continent which was stronger
than any of its neighbours. Thus, in the decades that followed Europe’s
powers began organising themselves into two armed alliances, one centring on Germany and
Austria-Hungary, and the other consisting of Britain, France and Russia. Other forces such as colonial rivalry and
regional nationalism combined to ensure that a regional crisis that occurred in the Balkans
in the summer of 1914 ballooned into a continent-wide conflict, which soon became the First World
War. In this Germany had much the better of the
fighting, but its resource base eventually proved insufficient once the United States
entered the war on Britain and France’s side. Thus, in November 1918 Germany surrendered. Political chaos would follow for several years
as a new German Republic was established. These events would eventually impact on the
entire trajectory of Frank’s life. Hans was drafted for military service in June
1918 when he finished at the Gymnasium in Munich and when he was just after turning
eighteen years of age. He was perhaps eager to fight, as his brother
Karl, who was eight years his senior, had been killed in the war, but Hans never saw
action himself before the war came to a conclusion the following November. As a result Frank moved on quickly to begin
studying law in Munich, a city which was riven by political debates and divisions in the
aftermath of the war. The country as a whole was divided in the
early days of its new republic between right-wing conservatives who pined for the empire which
Germany had now lost and those who wished to see a socialist or even a communist state
to be developed. An insurrection even occurred in Berlin in
January 1919 amongst revolutionaries who wanted to attempt something similar to the communist
revolution which had been attempted with great success in Russia in 1917. As these twin forces emerged in the aftermath
of the war the nascent German republic became an extremely turbulent place politically. In the late 1910s and early 1920s much of
this focused on hundreds of thousands of German men who had been demobilised in the aftermath
of the war. The Versailles Treaty, which brought the war
between Germany and Britain, France and their allies to a conclusion in 1919 stipulated
that the German army could only consist of a maximum of 100,000 men going forward. As a result many, many Germans began entering
paramilitary groups in 1919 and 1920 which were being used by the German government to
try to suppress political unrest by the socialists and other groups. Frank soon joined the most significant of
these groups, the Freikorps, or Free Corps, which in the course of the spring and early
summer of 1919 was responsible for crushing a short-lived communist republic based out
of Munich. Frank also joined the German Worker’s Party,
a new party which had emerged with the goal of re-strengthening Germany’s military power
in the aftermath of the war around this time. Finally, in 1919 he became a member of the
Thule-Gesellschaft, an Anti-Semitic, right-wing extremist group which attempted to blame Germany’s
recent woes on the country’s Jewish population. It was an ominous sign of the Anti-Semitism
which Frank would display in later years. Meanwhile, his legal studies continued in
ways that would also influence the subsequent course of his life. Out of this chaotic, radical politics of the
late 1910s and early 1920s a new party emerged in Bavaria in the spring of 1920. The National Socialist German Workers’ Party,
or Nazi Party for short, was a right-wing group whose earliest members generally came
from the earlier German Workers’ Party and the Freikorps, of both of which Frank had
been a member. Despite this he did not join the Nazis immediately,
though he did attend many speeches given by Adolf Hitler, a prominent member of the party
who became its leader in 1921, and Frank also began representing the Nazis in the many law
suits they quickly faced owing to their extremist and often violent activity in Munich and Bavaria. This earned him no little criticism within
legal circles and on at least one occasion in the early 1920s Frank was reprimanded by
a fellow lawyer in a Munich courtroom for continuing to act as legal counsel for a party
that was seen as dangerous to the social order. Despite this he became embedded in the Nazis,
eventually joining them and their paramilitary wing, the Stormtroopers or SA for short in
October 1923. Consequently, just weeks later, he was involved
in an abortive coup which the Nazis attempted in Munich on the 8th of November 1923 when
they took over the Beer Hall in central Munich. It was quickly suppressed within 24 hours. Following the abortive coup Frank spent some
time in Austria laying low and continuing his studies in Vienna before returning to
Germany in 1924. There he finished his legal studies at the
University of Kiel later that year and sat the state examinations in 1926. It was right around this time that the Nazis
began rejuvenating their party. Hitler was released from prison early in December
1924 and in the spring of 1925 he convinced the Bavarian authorities to lift a ban on
the party which had been imposed following the Putsch. As it did a new strategy was adopted to begin
trying to acquire power throughout Germany through the electoral process, rather than
by the violent measures used in 1923. Yet the Nazis continued to engage in certain
aggressive behaviour and the SA remained as a paramilitary wing of the organisation. As a result there were continuing legal challenges
constantly facing Hitler and many other members of the party. Frank began representing senior party members
in many of these cases, such that by 1927 he was effectively Hitler’s personal lawyer. He would represent him approximately 150 times
in court and by the late 1920s he was firmly established as the leading legal representative
for all of those who formed the leadership of the party during these early days of its
electoral progress. Frank was becoming established as the most
senior lawyer representing the Nazi Party at a time when the Nazis were set to become
the leading power in German politics. After years of excellent economic growth in
Europe and the Americas during the 1920s the world economy came to a shuddering halt in
the autumn of 1929 as the stock market on Wall Street in New York City experienced major
losses. An economic recession ensued and that was
quickly followed by the Great Depression, as economies all over the world stagnated. Some countries which had underlying debts,
weak banks and other economic problems were particularly badly hit. Germany was amongst these. As a result in the course of the early 1930s
millions of Germans began to lose their jobs as businesses and the service sector which
supplied them closed their doors. Then huge inflation kicked in, leading most
people to lose their life savings. And as anger and resentment about all of this
grew the more extremist political parties gained increasing support. The Nazis were chief amongst them. Although they had previously been able to
garner little more than 2% of the vote in an average national election, in the Reichstag
elections of September 1930 they won 18% and became the second largest party in Germany. Thus, Frank was now the legal representative
for a party which might plausibly enter government in the not too distant future. In 1930 Frank was called upon by Hitler to
investigate a particularly delicate matter. Rumours had begun to circulate amongst some
of the party’s leaders enemies that he was of partly Jewish descent. This was a toxic accusation for the leader
of a party which was in no small way based around blaming the Jewish people for all of
the woes of Germany’s recent past. In an effort to clear up the matter Hitler
tasked Frank with acquiring legally definitive proof that he was in no way possessed of Jewish
blood. Frank duly set about this and reported back
in Hitler’s favour, asserting that the rumours were without foundation. But curiously enough, many years later, Frank
claimed that he had actually concluded at the time that there was a possibility that
Hitler had some Jewish blood. The Nazi party leader’s grandmother, a woman
called Maria Anna Schicklgruber, had never married, but had given birth to a child out
of wedlock when she was 42 years of age. That child was Hitler’s father, Alois Hitler. The identity of Alois’s father had been
and still remains a mystery, but Frank claimed his investigations in the early 1930s could
not rule out the possibility that Alois’s mother had fallen pregnant through a relationship
with Leopold Frankenberger, a member of the Jewish Frankenberger family for whom she had
worked for a time as a cook. The Frankenberger family, Frank claimed, had
subsequently paid for Alois’s upbringing. Frank’s claims have, though, been dismissed
by many historians who have found no record of a Leopold Frankenberger and have assumed
Frank was mistaken in his claims or deliberately concocted them. Nevertheless, it is curious to speculate what
Frank might have made of it as he represented the Nazi leader in ever more legal suits which
were pending in the early 1930s as his personal lawyer. Though Hitler was facing ever growing amounts
of legal suits which Frank acted as his legal representative in during the early 1930s,
the contrary reality to these legal issues was that the Nazi leader was closer than ever
to gaining power in Germany. Though elections were not held for almost
two years after those of September 1930 the party had continued to gain more and more
members and support as the German economy showed no signs of recovery and teetered on
the brink of collapse. When new Reichstag elections were finally
held in the summer of 1932 the party doubled its vote to 37% and claimed 230 seats in the
608 seat parliament. Still the centrist parties refused to countenance
Hitler being made German chancellor and a government of technocrats was cobbled together. However, when it could not relieve the crisis
and fresh elections in November failed to break the political impasse, an agreement
was finally reached in January 1933 whereby Hitler would become German Chancellor and
the Nazis would acquire several ministerial briefs. It was a fateful decision. Within weeks a political emergency was concocted
in order to pass through an Enabling Act in March 1933 which allowed Hitler and the Nazis
to effectively rule by decree. The Weimar Republic was dead and the Nazis
were now in control of Germany. With the ascent to power of Hitler Frank found
himself being rewarded for his loyalty. Back in 1928 he had established the National
Socialist German Jurists Association, with himself as its first leader, and in 1930 he
had won a seat in the Reichstag representing Leignitz. Thus, when positions were being handed out
in the spring of 1933 Frank was an obvious candidate to be given the position of Minister
of Justice for Bavaria, the Nazi heartland within Germany, while he was also appointed
as a Minister without Portfolio in the new government. Finally, in the summer of 1933 he was made
a Reichsleiter or Reich Leader. This was the second highest rank within the
regime, next to Hitler himself. There were 16 Reichsleiters appointed in 1933
and Frank was now afforded this status along with individuals such as the head of the SS,
Heinrich Himmler, the Minister for Propaganda, Joseph Goebbels, Hitler’s deputy leader,
Rudolf Hess, and Ernst Rohm, the head of the SA or Stormtroopers. In the months that followed he also established
the Academy for German Law and became its first president and was named one of the three
senior judges of the Supreme Party Court. Thus, by early 1934 Frank had emerged as the
most significant legal figure within the Nazi regime. While Frank was acting as the face of legal
institutions such as the Academy for German Law and the Supreme Party Court in the mid-1930s
the Nazis themselves were transgressing their own international legal commitments. The terms of the Treaty of Versailles still
restricted German’s right in law to rearm beyond the nominal army of 100,000 men which
they were allowed to retain following the end of the First World War. The Weimar government had itself pushed these
limits as far as possible, training tens of thousands more individuals than were officially
recorded, but the Nazis went much further. Beginning in the spring of 1935 the regime
made known its intention to begin vastly exceeding the 100,000 man quota by recruiting and training
upwards of 400,000 men. At the same time it was announced that a new
German air-force called the Luftwaffe would be set up, a violation of the restriction
which prohibited Germany from having any such air-force. Then a year later in the spring of 1936 German
forces moved into the Rhineland region of western Germany which had been demilitarised
as part of the terms of Versailles. All of this was ominous, but Germany’s remilitarisation
would soon be eclipsed as it began making claims on the territories of its neighbours
in Central Europe. His newfound position of power would not last
long. Frank did actually have scruples early on
when it came to the Nazis ignoring legal norms. Thus, in 1934 he began complaining about extra-judicial
killings of political prisoners and others, which were being carried out at the Dachau
concentration camp near Munich. The region fell within his area of oversight
as Minister of Justice for Bavaria. More significantly, Frank was opposed to the
series of purges of the leadership of the SA which were carried out between the 30th
of June and the 2nd of July 1934. These were designed to curb the growing power
of the SA’s commander, Ernst Rohm, who was viewed as a growing threat to Hitler as the
SA’s numbers surpassed two million Stormtroopers. The Night of the Long Knives saw Rohm and
many other political enemies across Germany murdered by the Nazi regime. Frank had made his opposition known and this,
combined with Hitler’s natural antipathy towards the legal profession, saw Frank side-lined. In December 1934 he resigned his position
as Minister of Justice for Bavaria and, while he retained some of his other positions, including
that of Reichsleiter and Minister without Portfolio, his influence over the regime dried
up from late 1934 onwards. Frank would spend the next several years in
a political wilderness. Frank’s fortunes improved little as the
months and then years passed by in the mid-to-late 1930s, even as his legal writings became more
and more concerned with fashioning the law around Nazi ideology and in particular its’
Anti-Semitism. War would change that. Beginning in early 1938 the regime took a
more confrontational stance towards the powers of Europe. In March of that year an aggressive move against
Austria succeeded in having the country vote to amalgamate with Berlin into a Greater Germany. No sooner was this completed, but Hitler began
pressing German claims to the German-speaking parts of western Czechoslovakia known as the
Sudetenland. Britain and France capitulated to this demand
at a conference in Munich in September 1938, but this only briefly allayed German aggression
and the rest of Czechoslovakia was effectively forcibly annexed in March 1939. The city of Memel was taken from Lithuania
just days later. This was the last act of aggression Britain
and France were willing to countenance, so when Hitler very quickly began pressing claims
on Poland the allies made it clear that any further land grab would result in war. The Nazis were not dissuaded and on the 1st
of September invaded Poland. Two days later Britain and France followed
through on their threat and declared war on Germany in the first acts of what would soon
be transformed into the Second World War. Frank would become intimately connected with
Poland for the remainder of his life, in ways that have made him one of the most notorious
members of the Nazi regime. Having become used to being in the political
wilderness since the mid-1930s, he was surprisingly selected at the beginning of the invasion
of Poland to act as the Chief of Administration to Gerd von Rundstedt, one of the most senior
field marshals of the German army in Poland. The Polish campaign went very quickly, as
Germany’s eastern neighbour was unable to stand up to the onslaught of the Nazi forces
and given the geography involved Britain and France could offer very little by way of practical
aid. As a result the country had been defeated
militarily within weeks. And this was the moment at which the even
more surprising decision was taken to appoint Frank as the first Governor of what was christened
as the General Government of Poland, a region comprising about one-third of the Polish Republic. The choice was peculiar. Frank was not a military man who had some
obvious qualification to serve as governor of an occupied region. Neither had he ever shown any special interest
in Polish affairs in a way which would suggest him as a man to administer the occupied country. Indeed he did not even speak or understand
Polish. By any standard it was an unusual decision. The country or administrative region which
Frank was to oversee did not comprise the entire territory of what had been until recently
the Second Polish Republic. Rather Poland was split into three separate
parts by an agreement known as the Annexation Decree on the Administration of the Occupied
Polish Territories, which was issued by Hitler on the 8th of October 1939. The western part of Poland was annexed directly
into the German Third Reich. The eastern sector of Poland was then annexed
directly by the Soviet Union. This was in keeping with an agreement the
Nazis had reached with the Soviet Union just days before the invasion of Poland. Through the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact Germany
and Russia had agreed to divide up Eastern Europe between them. Russia would receive a third of Poland under
these terms and had invaded this section of the country shortly after Germany’s initial
invasion. That left approximately one-third of the country
which was not directly annexed into either the German Third Reich or the Soviet Union. It was this region in central and southern
Poland, and extending into what is now western Ukraine, which would be formed into the General
Government for the Occupied Polish Region and which Frank was made Governor General
of in October 1939. He would serve in that position for the duration
of the Second World War. The area ruled by the General Government had
a population of approximately 11.4 million people when it was established in the late
autumn of 1939. It also included Poland’s most significant
cities, notably Warsaw, Krakow and Lublin, as well as Lviv in what is now western Ukraine. Frank was the most senior figure within the
administration as Governor General, but there were others with whom he had to contend and
who would play a significant role in future events. A State Secretary was appointed as a sort
of Deputy Governor. Initially Arthur Seyss-Inquart was appointed
to this role but he was moved westwards to Amsterdam following the Nazi invasion of Western
Europe in the summer of 1940. Thus, Josef Buhler was made State Secretary
in 1940 and would hold the position for the remainder of the war. Buhler was an old ally of Frank’s who had
worked in his office in Berlin prior to the war. However, Frank had no ally in the other senior
figure within the administration. This was Friedrich-Wilhelm Kruger, the Higher
SS and Police Leader of the General Government. As head of the state police services in the
General Government Kruger was able to claim seniority over Frank in several spheres of
activity and the pair would clash on many issues during the early 1940s. We might also ask what the purpose of the
General Government was. Why had Hitler chosen to directly annex part
of Poland into the Third Reich, but establish an occupied territory out of another section
of it? The answer, as with so much else to do with
the Nazis, had a racial basis to it. As the parts of western and north-western
Poland that were annexed into the Reich had a significant ethnically German population
and had formed parts of Prussia from the late eighteenth century these were viewed as racially
pure. However, the area of the General Government
was populated overwhelmingly by Poles, with a Ukrainian majority in the far east of the
administrative zone. As such the plan for the region was to impose
a radical and brutal policy of Germanisation. Many Poles, and in particular Polish Jews,
of which there were over 1.5 million within the General Government’s borders, would
be mass murdered or deported to create Lebensraum or ‘Living Space’ for German colonists. Over a period of 10 to 15 years 4 to 5 million
German colonists would then be brought into the region. Those Poles and Ukrainians who remained would
be expected to work as a new serf class for the new colonial Germans who would be their
overlords. This was the warped experiment in social engineering
that Frank was charged with implementing the first stages of as Governor General. Because of this peculiar situation, whereby
the General Government was to be treated as a military colony in preparation, the region
Frank administered remained heavily militarised throughout his tenure as governor. In the first months of the occupation, as
Frank’s regime carried out a ruthless suppression of the Polish political and intellectual class,
half a million German soldiers remained stationed in the region. This number dropped slightly in 1940 as Germany’s
war effort shifted elsewhere, but in general there was always a standing garrison of approximately
400,000 German military personnel in the General Government, with an average of about 70,000
police and security services personnel also operating here. To put this in perspective, this amounted
to approximately one German military personnel for every 20 Polish citizens. Moreover, this number ratio actually grew
smaller still as the number of people killed or deported by the Nazis spiralled into the
millions in the course of the war. Thus, the General Government under Frank might
best be described as a kind of giant open-air prison where over eleven million Poles were
guarded by over a half a million Germans. Frank’s approach to the people he was appointed
to govern was brutal. Shortly before he took up his position he
declared that after the occupation of Poland, (to quote), “only one thing counts: the
use of the land by ruthless exploitation, taking away all stocks important to the German
war economy, demanding manpower for the benefit of employment in the Reich, reducing the entire
Polish economy to a level where only the barest essentials remain for the poorest and the
closing down of all educational institutions, in particular the technical and high schools
in order to prevent the rise of a new generation of Polish intellectuals.” This was reflected in his attitudes towards
groups such as the Roman Catholic Church, a powerful institution within Poland. Frank ensured that the church could not become
a focus for resistance to the occupation and closed down churches systematically. Hundreds of priests were murdered every year
during the early 1940s and approximately 3,000 clergy were killed in all during his time
as governor. More broadly he viewed anything that might
allow an independent Polish culture to flourish as dangerous and Poles under the occupation
were not allowed radio sets or even to attend cinemas and theatres in case Polish cultural
shows were staged. Frank established himself in the capital of
the General Government, Krakow, with almost regal pretensions. In early November 1939 he moved into the historic
Wawel royal palace there with his family. Back in April 1925 Hans had married Brigitte
Herbst after a brief courtship. Eventually they had five children, Sigrid,
Norman, Brigitte, Michael and Niklas. Once ensconced in the palace in Krakow, Brigitte
Frank, a domineering woman who engaged in multiple extra-marital affairs, began referring
to herself as the Queen of Poland and became notorious for her corrupt behaviour, often
travelling around the city to various locations and events to abscond with furs, jewels and
money from the homes of formerly wealthy Poles. Eventually her behaviour began to draw attention
to what was perceived to be an overt level of corruption associated with Frank. Hans also eventually grew tired of his wife’s
actions and after reconnecting with a childhood sweetheart, Lilly Groh, in 1942 he sought
a divorce, one which was refused when Brigitte headed to Berlin and personally sought an
audience with Hitler where she successfully petitioned him to block what could have been
an embarrassing separation for the regime. Frank never had total control over the General
Government. As the region was viewed as a zone of military
activity, the SS and the Reich Security Main Office, headed respectively by Heinrich Himmler
and Reinhard Heydrich, as well as the secret police, the Gestapo, under Heinrich Muller,
all had significant jurisdictional oversight over a great many affairs in Poland. Indeed any assessment of Frank’s responsibility
for the level of violence and death which characterised the region during the Second
World War must take account of the fact that often he was not the person responsible for
either deciding upon this or even overseeing it. The SS, in particular, were a power unto themselves
within the General Government and entirely outside of Frank’s sphere of control. Indeed the governor and Himmler had multiple
arguments in the early 1940s about the excessive authority the SS and police services held
and their lack of respect for any form of rule of law or normal judicial procedure. Eventually these tensions boiled over in 1942
in a direct clash between Frank and the effective head of the SS in the General Government,
Friedrich Wilhem Kruger, after Frank complained about Kruger simply ignoring him and acting
as though the SS did not have to make any effort to include Frank’s administration
in his decisions and actions. The outcome, when it was reported back to
Berlin, showed exactly how limited Frank’s authority was. Hitler sided with the SS and while Frank was
retained as the governor of the General Government he was stripped of the vast majority of his
other positions back in Germany. Somebody in Frank’s position as head of
the Nazi government in Poland must have gone through fluctuating emotions over the course
of the first years of the Second World War. After the swift conquest of Poland, Hitler
had waited until the spring of 1940 before launching a rapid conquest of Denmark and
Norway. Weeks later Germany invaded the Low Countries
and France and conquered Western Europe in a blistering campaign which lasted just six
weeks. However, Britain remained independent despite
a concerted campaign to bomb it into submission from the summer of 1940 onwards. A year later Frank was in charge of Poland
as a huge troop build-up was undertaken in the region as Germany prepared to invade the
Soviet Union. At first Operation Barbarossa, the codename
for the initial invasion of Russia, went well and by the late autumn of 1941 the Germans
were threatening to take Moscow and Leningrad. The leader of the Soviet Union, Joseph Stalin,
even considered surrendering vast stretches of territory to Germany as part of a peace
agreement. But that winter things changed. The German advance stalled and thousands of
troops died in the harsh Russian winter. Perhaps as events became more precarious Frank
must have wondered if the General Government would one day see Russian troops advancing
towards Berlin. The Nazis’ approach towards the Jewish people
had been intensifying for years. Though Hitler and his followers had always
exhibited a vicious Anti-Semitism, after their ascent to power in 1933 they had generally
favoured a strategy of trying to pressure Germany’s half a million Jews into leaving
the country by persecuting them through a series of measures known as the Nuremburg
Laws. As we have seen, Frank was in favour of moulding
German law in this way to fit the party’s racial ideology. This was already escalating by late 1938 when
thousands of Jewish businesses were attacked in the events of Kristallnacht, the Night
of the Broken Glass on the 9th and 10th of November, the occasion of the murder of hundreds
of Jews and detention of thousands more. With the onset of the war the situation changed
yet again. Poland was home to approximately three and
a half million Jews when Germany invaded in 1939. This was a mass of people which it was not
possible to simply coerce into leaving and plans for the forcible deportation of the
Jews of Eastern Europe to either the Middle East or the East African island of Madagascar
were given serious consideration for some time while Frank was governing this mass of
people in southern and eastern Poland. However, in the course of 1940 and early 1941,
as the war effort seemed to be going well for the Nazis, a more sinister scheme began
to be developed. There is still disagreement today as to when
exactly the so-called Final Solution to what the Nazis called “the Jewish problem”
was actually decided upon, but it was evidently sometime in the late spring or early summer
as the plans for the invasion of Russia were being finalised. At that time measures were put in place to
have the Einsatzgruppen, which had already been involved in the mass murder of the Polish
political and cultural classes in 1939 and 1940, advance behind the Germany army into
the Soviet Union, mass murdering Jewish communities as they went. At the same time the first steps were undertaken
towards developing extermination centres at some of the dozens of concentration camps
which the Nazis had erected across Central and Eastern Europe. It was now planned that the Jews of those
parts of Europe already under Nazi occupation, of which roughly half were in the territory
governed by Frank as part of the General Government, would be identified, detained and shipped
to these specific camps where they would be murdered en masse. This new plan was related to over a dozen
senior Nazi officials at a conference in the Berlin suburb of Wannsee on the 20th of January
1942 including Josef Buhler, the State Secretary of the General Government and Frank’s right-hand
man. It was the beginning of the Holocaust of Europe’s
Jews. Under Frank’s governorship the region administered
by the General Government became the central focus of the Holocaust of Europe’s Jews. While there were dozens of concentration camps
that had been established by the Nazis across Europe, and some level of death and brutality
existed in all of these, the Holocaust was truly carried out at six major death camps
or extermination camps which were constructed in such a way as to facilitate this with facilities
for mass murder and crematoria to burn the bodies afterwards. Of these death camps, four, Treblinka, Majdanek,
Sobibor and Belzec, were within the territory of the General Government, while Auschwitz-Birkenau
was just over the border in the part of Poland which had been directly annexed into the Third
Reich. Only Chelmno in western Poland was at any
significant remove from the General Government. The level of murder at these camps was appalling. 800,000 people, most of them Jews, were killed
at Treblinka and 600,000 at Belzec, with 250,000 and at least 80,000 also perishing at Sobibor
and Majdanek. When the over one million people who were
killed at Auschwitz-Birkenau are considered over three million people died at the five
camps in or adjoining the territory of the General Government in Poland. These camps were run by the SS independent
of Frank’s administration in Krakow. But that does not mean that the civil government
there was not involved. Much of what Frank’s administration was
effectively charged with doing throughout these years was facilitating the identification
of Jews and other people deemed enemies of the state, detaining them and then facilitating
their transport to the death camps where most were killed within the space of hours of their
arrival by being gassed to death. Indeed Frank’s regime had been deliberately
engaging in policies which were aimed at murdering the Jewish people living within the boundaries
of the General Government even before the Final Solution was adopted and began to be
implemented. Thus, for instance, there was a conscious
effort to deprive Jewish people in particular of vital resources in the region Frank administered,
notably food, but also core necessities such as coal. The idea here was to potentially either starve
thousands of Jews to death or have them freeze to death. This was mass murder by resource starvation,
all overseen by Frank’s administration at the Wawel palace in Krakow. The epicentre of these combined efforts at
persecuting the General Government’s Jews and preparing for their transport to the death
camps was the Warsaw Ghetto. Prior to the war the city of Warsaw had a
huge Jewish population and some parts of the city were essentially Jewish enclaves, where
Jewish people made up upwards of 80% to 90% of the population. This number had grown in the course of the
German invasion of 1939 as Jewish communities fled eastwards from the advancing German army
to Warsaw. Here Frank’s regime, along with the SS and
the other security services quickly implemented a form of martial law as soon as Poland had
been fully occupied. Jews were forced to wear a white armband and
all Jewish businesses had to display a Star of David above their entrance. By early 1940 food stamps had been introduced
and resources coming into the city were severely curtailed. Then in April Frank’s administration began
building a wall around the Jewish district which officially became a Ghetto in November
1940, wherein over 400,000 people were effectively detained inside an open air prison. By 1941 a systematic policy of starving the
Jewish people here to death was initiated, as they were only allocated approximately
200 calories of food per day. By 1942 the Ghetto had turned into a quagmire
of diseases, starvation and death, although the Jewish inhabitants managed to maintain
some form of normal life and culture, despite their hardships. Nearly 100,000 of the Jewish inhabitants died
under these conditions. And then the deportations commenced, mostly
to Treblinka. Between the summer of 1942 and Yom Kippur
in late September that year over quarter of a million people were transported from the
Ghetto to the death camps, though at this early stage in the implementation of the Final
Solution many people did not know where they were being taken to. Within weeks the signs were ominous, however,
and even as the numbers of people living within the Ghetto decline dramatically those who
remained began to organise themselves into a resistance movement known as the Jewish
Combat Organisation led by 24 year old Mordecai Anielewicz. Aided by the Polish resistance which smuggled
weapons into them, they prepared to resist further deportation efforts undertaken by
the SS and Frank’s administration between late September 1942 and January 1943. Then, when the Germans re-entered the Ghetto
in January with the aim of liquidating it over the following few weeks they launched
an uprising. Despite being hemmed in and facing the might
of the Nazi war machine, approximately 1,000 Jewish resistance fighters managed to wage
a guerrilla conflict against the Germans, mostly SS commandos, for three months before
thousands of Waffen-SS were sent in to crush the Ghetto Uprising on the eve of Passover,
the 19th of April 1943. Following this the Ghetto was effectively
liquidated and the remaining 35,000 occupants who were not murdered on the spot were deported
to the death camps. With measures such as this was the Holocaust
carried out in the General Government under Frank’s rule. The increasing brutality that was being seen
in parts of Nazi-occupied Europe such as Poland was in direct parallel with the shifting fortunes
of Germany on the battlefield. After the German advance had stopped at Leningrad
and Moscow in the winter of 1941 the Russians were able to use this time to build up their
war production and conscript many more men. By 1942 they were pushing back against the
Germans and an ultimate showdown at the city of Stalingrad throughout the autumn and winter
that year resulted in Russian victory. Thereafter the Soviets began to push the Germans
out of Russia and back towards Frank’s General Government in Poland. Meanwhile, in December 1941 the United States
had entered the war on Britain and Russia’s side. With a flood of new men and war material the
Allies were able to gain victory over Italy and Germany in the North Africa campaign early
in 1943 and invaded Sicily to open a Southern Front that summer. A Western Front soon followed in the summer
of 1944 when France was invaded and quickly reconquered. Thus, by 1943 it must have been clear to leading
Nazi officials such as Frank that barring the successful development of some game-changing
weapon such as a nuclear bomb, which the Germans were working on, the war would eventually
end in Germany’s defeat and the end of the Third Reich. As the war effort turned fatally against Germany,
the level of unrest and resistance within Poland and the area of the General Government
increased accordingly. There had always been a major resistance movement
within Poland, backed by a government in exile in London, but from 1943 onwards this was
increasingly supplied by the Soviets as they advanced westwards into Ukraine and eastern
Poland. These resistance movements were united under
the banner of the Polish Secret State, which began murdering hundreds of Germans in the
General Government area. Then in late 1943 they began working on plans
to assassinate Frank, inspired in part by the assassination of Reinhard Heydrich, the
acting governor of the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia in modern-day Czechia in the early
summer of 1942. They moved on the 29th of January 1944 when
a bomb was placed on a train which Frank would be travelling on from Krakow to Lviv, the
major city in the Ukrainian part of the east of the General Government. The bomb detonated on the underside of the
train 22 kilometres outside of Krakow, at 11.17 pm and blew the last axle off of Frank’s
train carriage, but while the train derailed, he himself was uninjured. The following day he undertook the journey
by plane, flying at a low altitude in appalling weather. Polish prisoners were executed on Frank’s
orders as a reprisal and security measures were increased across the General Government. The assassination attempt was just a prelude
to the outbreak of a much more severe form of resistance. In the spring of 1944 the Polish Secret State
began preparing for a massive uprising against German occupation as the Red Army advanced
further into Poland. The focus of it would symbolically be on the
city of Warsaw and the goal was that German forces would be divided between fighting the
Russian advance to the east and the insurrection within the General Government in such a way
that would allow for the success of the uprising and a speedier liberation of Poland from Nazi
rule. This was not mere impatience. In 1944 as the war entered its final stages
the Nazi regime had become particularly vicious as it sought to murder as many of its racial,
ideological and political enemies as possible before it lost control of individual regions. Over 400,000 of Hungary’s 750,000 Jewish
people would be killed in the space of six months in 1944 alone, after the Nazis took
direct control of the country. Thus, although it was later criticised as
being a premature insurrection, the Polish resistance launched its uprising in Warsaw
on the 1st of August 1944. It would last for two months, however it would
ultimately prove unsuccessful as both the Western Allies and the Red Army, the latter
of which was most suitably positioned to do so, failed to provide adequate support to
the uprising. This was despite the views of the British
Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, that it was imperative to aid Britain’s Polish allies. While the Warsaw Uprising failed in the autumn
of 1944, the liberation of the General Government was not long following in any event. After some stiff resistance in the autumn
months, the German defence of Poland began to collapse in the winter as Hitler focused
Germany’s military efforts on one last major campaign against the Western Allies in the
Ardennes region in Luxembourg and Belgium near the Franco-German border. As a result the General Government was broadly
overrun by the Red Army in December 1944 and January 1945. There was not much left of Warsaw to liberate,
as the city had been virtually levelled in the weeks following the Uprising. By mid-January Russian troops had surrounded
Krakow. Frank’s wife Brigitte and their children
had already left for Germany in December and he now decided to abscond back to the Reich
himself just before midday on the 17th of January. Air raid sirens had been ringing out in central
Krakow all that morning and Frank had received word that Russian tanks had penetrated the
outer defences of the city. Thus, he beat a hasty retreat from the capital
of the General Government which he had governed for over five years at lunchtime that day
in a column of cars with his senior administrators. Krakow fell just 24 hours later. Curiously Frank’s offices were full of documentation
and evidence of his administration’s activity which they had neglected to destroy. It was noted that the offices were strewn
with empty liquor bottles, a not uncommon site in regions which the Nazis had fled from
in late 1944 and early 1945. Frank made his way back to Germany in the
weeks that followed, but his destination was not Berlin, but Bavaria, where he had spent
so much of his career in the 1920s and 1930s. He arrived there by early February and sent
word to Berlin that he was ready to continue serving the regime in whatever way was deemed
necessary. However, Frank had been stripped of his positions
within Germany itself in 1942 and with the General Government now effectively dissolved
following the Russian occupation of the region he effectively held no position or authority. On one occasion when he attempted to give
orders to a junior officer, the man simply walked away while Frank was talking. Thus, the former governor spent the remaining
months of the war as a powerless former official. It was in this non-role that he learned in
the first two days of May that Hitler had killed himself on the 30th of April in Berlin
as the Russians closed on the city centre. His appointed successor, the propaganda minister,
Joseph Goebbels, imitated his master on the 1st of May and thereafter German forces surrendered
in Berlin. The war officially came to an end on the 8th
of May, by which time Frank was under arrest. He had been detained in Bavaria on the 4th
of May. In the days that followed the man termed ‘The
Jew Butcher of Krakow’ by some of his captors, was treated roughly, receiving more than one
beating. The details are not entirely clear, but it
also seems that he attempted to kill himself twice, once by trying to cut his throat and
then by cutting his wrists. Eventually he was taken to a more secure military
prison near Berchtesgaden. In the weeks that followed Frank was identified
as one of the most wanted individuals within the Nazi regime, one who would stand trial
at the International Military Tribunal to be held at the city of Nuremburg. This involved nearly two dozen of the most
senior surviving members of the regime and Frank stood trial here from November 1945
onwards alongside individuals such as Herman Goering, the head of the Luftwaffe and one
of the chief ministers of the Nazi regime; Albert Speer, colloquially known as Hitler’s
architect and a figure who had ran the German armaments industry from 1942 onwards, overseeing
the slave labour of the hundreds of thousands of Poles whom Frank had forcibly deported
to Germany to work in factories there; Joachim von Ribbentrop, the German Foreign Minister
who had negotiated the pact with the Soviet Union in 1939 that had preceded the invasion
of Poland; and Alfred Rosenberg, the Minister for the Occupied Eastern Territories with
whom Frank had worked regularly during the war. Each was accused of crimes against peace,
planning and initiating a war of aggression, participating in war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The trial began on the 20th of November 1945
and would last for over ten months, with proceedings watched closely by the world. Frank’s conduct during the trial was different
to most of the other defendants. From early on in proceedings he expressed
remorse for his conduct. For instance, towards the early summer of
1946, roughly five months into trial proceedings, he stated that, “I myself, speaking from
the very depths of my feelings and having lived through the five months of this trial,
want to say that now after I have gained a full insight into all the horrible atrocities
which have been committed, I am possessed by a deep sense of guilt.” He also apparently experienced a religious
awakening and converted to Roman Catholicism under the guidance of Sixtus O’Connor, a
Franciscan pastor who had been appointed for the pastoral care of the Catholic defendants. He even claimed to have had several religious
experiences during the lengthy trial. In addition Frank noted throughout the trial
that he himself had not been responsible for the development of the death camps in the
General Government and that most of the atrocities which had occurred there, resulting in millions
of deaths, had been carried out by the SS. Yet by way of contrast the prosecution was
able to present extensive evidence from the 43 volumes of Frank’s diaries which had
been acquired by the tribunal. These demonstrated time and time again Frank’s
severe Anti-Semitism and his clear views that mass murder of Jews and Poles in the General
Government was something to be celebrated. The trial eventually drew to a conclusion
in late September 1946 and the verdicts were presented on the 1st of October. The other defendant who had expressed remorse,
Albert Speer, was spared death and sentenced to life in prison, but Frank, despite his
apparent contrition, had been the governor of the region where some of the Nazis’ most
heinous crimes had been committed. Accordingly, there was no way he would receive
a lenient judgement and he was sentenced to death by hanging along with many of his fellow
defendants such as Goering, Ribbentrop and Rosenberg. They were to be executed just over two weeks
later in the Nuremburg Prison on the 16th of October 1946. It was noted on the day in question that Frank
was the only one of those sentenced to death who entered the execution chamber with a smile
on his face. Observers at the time claimed that, although
he was evidently nervous too, Frank seemed to welcome the prospect of atoning for his
sins. When asked if he had any last words, Frank
replied, “I am thankful for the kind treatment during my captivity and I ask God to accept
me with mercy.” Minutes later he was hung to death. His body and those of the ten other Nuremburg
defendants who had been sentenced to death were cremated shortly thereafter and their
remains were scattered in the River Isar to avoid their remains becoming any kind of shrine
to the Nazi leadership. Though he is perhaps one of the less well-known
leaders of the Nazi regime today, Hans Frank was one of those most responsible for the
crimes of the Nazis during the Second World War. As head of the General Government in Poland
he oversaw a region where some of the most brutal actions perpetrated by the Nazis were
committed. For instance, four of the main death camps
involved in the Holocaust, Treblinka, Sobibor, Majdanek and Belzec, were located within Frank’s
jurisdiction, while Auschwitz-Birkenau was just over the border in the part of Poland
directly annexed to the Third Reich. Moreover, it was in Poland in the early stages
of the war where brutal tactics such as those employed during Operation Tannenberg and the
use of the Einsatzgruppen were first developed. In time these same tactics would be used further
to the east following the invasion of Russia, resulting in millions of deaths. In total, by the time Frank fled westwards
to Germany in January 1945, over four million of the eleven and a half million Poles and
Ukrainians who had lived under the General Government when it was created late in 1939
had lost their lives. Thus, Frank’s period as governor saw the
death of over 35% of the population. This would seem to mark Frank as one of the
most brutal figures of the entire regime. Yet it could be argued that Frank himself
was not overtly responsible for this level of death. Despite being known as ‘The Butcher of Poland’
and ‘The Jew Butcher of Krakow’, Frank was ultimately a governor with quite limited
powers in a country where the SS and the police services had greater power than any civilian
governor. In a sense, the head of the SS, Heinrich Himmler,
and a number of figures such as Franz Stangl, the commandant of Treblinka and Sobibor, were
actually those who oversaw the programmes of mass murder in southern Poland and western
Ukraine, rather than Frank. Moreover, the governor was one of the only
defendants at the first Nuremburg trial to exhibit any sense of remorse about his wartime
conduct. Ultimately, however, whatever the extenuating
circumstances might have been, no retrospective remorse, no matter how genuine it possibly
was, can absolve Frank of his crimes. Under his tenure as governor of the General
Government nearly three million Jews were killed there, as well as hundreds of thousands
of other Poles and Ukrainians, while countless more were deported to Germany as slave labourers,
many of whom also faced death. Indeed in 1944 Frank boasted that there were
only 100,000 Jews left alive in the area under his control. That ultimately is how he should be remembered,
not as somebody who demonstrated remorse before a court in the aftermath of the war. What do you think of Hans Frank? Should he be condemned as severely as all
of the other senior Nazi officials or does his public repentance for his deeds in the
last months of his life warrant a slightly less harsh appraisal of him? Please let us know in the comment section,
and in the meantime, thank you very much for watching.|||The Jewish service of morning prayer,
Shacharit, in Warsaw’s main synagogue. Led, proudly, by the
Chief Rabbi of Poland. -The fact that there is noise behind me
because the people that had prayed are now having breakfast together
is a sign that there is Jewish life! A resurgence of Jewish life in Poland?
For many, a highly unexpected development. This was the country that Nazi Germany
chose as the epicenter of a systematic genocide in which six million
Jews died across Europe. -We don’t talk a
lot about Auschwitz. -This person has
a gift. A great gift. -We desperately
needed a Rabbi. -A Catholic bishop is among the various
public figures attending this interfaith service in Warsaw. The host: Michael
Schudrich, Chief Rabbi of Poland. An interfaith prayer wishing that
anti-Semitism will finally disappear . . . -Change doesn’t happen overnight. It
takes time, but as long as you see you’re going in the right direction, it gives
you energy and it gives you hope. And it’s that hope that sustains the work
of Michael Schudrich. This is his office in Warsaw’s Nożyk Synagogue — also
a HOME for the American-born rabbi. -You never find what you
want when you need it . . . The son of a New York rabbi, he
first visited the country in the 1970s — in search of his roots. His grandparents had
left Europe before the Second World War. In Communist-ruled Poland,
Schudrich found a few Jews struggling to preserve what
was left of their heritage. -The diaries I wrote in 79, my
impressions when I met different people, I remember one thing: Oh, this
person has the mezuzah on the inside of the door and not on the outside,
and I thought that someone was being embarrassed to be Jewish. But I
realized later that it was a tremendous statement of being Jewish because no
one had it on the outside and almost no one had it on the inside. Having to
understand what something meant here. After the collapse of Communism, Schudrich
— now a rabbi himself — relocated to Warsaw and embarked on a mission: to re-establish
Jewish religious life in Poland. -This is the first time that a Jewish
prayer book was reprinted in Poland after the fall of Communism. This is
the original page, was from 1926. This is probably
from 91, 92. Before that, there were few if any Jewish
religious books here. Now, thirty years on, Warsaw has a flourishing
Jewish school again, with 200 students. This year will see the
first of them graduate. Joanna Niemirska’s children attend
the school. Like thousands of other Polish Jews, it was only after the fall of
Communism that she started to embrace her Jewish identity... thanks
also to the dedication of Chief Rabbi
Michael Schudrich. The Jewish school has been a
blessing for Joanna Niemierska, her husband Lukasz
and their three children. -It’s so big luggage of problems... of
past...of everything that it’s never neutral. -And the minority here is a
real minority. So, it’s real — sometimes it feels like we’re
all weirdos in our own country. -There’s a growing climate of trust. I
think that’s the most important thing. Obviously, there are still many
prejudices and traumas left over from the Second World War. They’ve
been passed down from generation to generation. The war didn’t just destroy
— or at least try to destroy — human dignity; to a great extent, it also
destroyed the mutual trust between people — including the trust between
the Jewish and Polish peoples. It’s December and Hanukkah, the Jewish
Festival of Lights, is approaching. The rabbi offers some
guidelines to the teachers. -An important question is whether to
give the children presents at Hanukkah. A few hundred years ago, there was
the so-called “Hanukkah gelt.” Children were given money to buy themselves
something. Today, it’s perfectly fine to give Jewish children a small present
on every Hanukkah evening. You don’t have to, of course. It used to be
Hanukkah gelt, or some chocolate. We’re living here under strong Christian cultural
influences. The Christmas season is at a similar time of the year to Hanukkah.
So, let’s give the children presents. Schudrich has been working in Poland for
the past thirty years. The school is one of many funded by the American
philanthropist Ronald S. Lauder to promote Jewish
life in eastern Europe. -We needed somebody to go to Poland.
I heard about this rabbi named Michael Schudrich. So we brought him over.
We saw him, and we said: “This is the right person.” We installed him in a
synagogue — in ’90, ’91. And also was involved in the beginning, the start
of a school, a kindergarten. But what is interesting is that, the minute he got to
Poland, he became much more involved with the community, much more
Polish, and he started to learn Polish. -We desperately needed a rabbi — any
rabbi. But Michael Schudrich wasn’t just any rabbi. I remember his first trip. That
was already Rychwald. So it must have been early nineties. He’d just arrived
after flying nonstop from New York or so. He was that tired, but he still had
a session with the teenagers, and they were pestering him with questions,
and eventually Michael, very tired, said, “Ok, guys! Tomorrow’s another day.
Let’s just sleep over it.” And he’s trying to rise from the armchair he was sitting
in, and the girls just shoved him back. “You don’t understand! We’re the
next generation of Jewish mothers in this country. We need to
know everything now!” Monika and Stanislaw
Krajewski remained faithful to their heritage even
during the Communist era. -We had begun before that, you know,
much earlier. This is Monika’s book — the second one, by the way
— of the cemeteries in Poland. The Krajewskis researched this aspect of
Jewish heritage first. Some 90 percent of the Jewish population of Poland
were murdered during the German occupation. Most of those who survived
did so by going underground or pretending to be Christian — and losing their
Jewish identity. These old cemeteries are a precious reminder of Poland’s extensive
Jewish population before the Holocaust. -It was like an eye-opener — eye opening
to the presence of the Jewish past. In my circle of friends there were many
who had Jewish ancestry, but we didn’t learn anything Jewish. We
didn’t feel Jewish when we were children because we
were not introduced to it. The Krajewskis have been living their
lives in accordance with Jewish traditions and scripture for two generations now.
Their son, Daniel, was prepared for his bar mitzvah — the Jewish coming of age
ceremony for boys — by Rabbi Schudrich. The Chief Rabbi is now off
on a trip to southern Poland. He’s constantly on the move. And
sometimes that means mobile conferencing in the car. Today, he’s talking to
a Jewish community in Pittsburgh. He’s setting up an exchange program
for young Jews from Poland and the U.S. -I think our biggest challenge on the
very practical — and it is less, but still existing on follow-up — is we don’t
necessarily have the professional staff to follow up
the way we should. With a plethora of projects to watch over,
it often seems like too much for one man. -Who said it was going to be easy? I
can say that the Jewish community of Poland in the last 30 years has gone
from a stagnating, dying, dysfunctional Jewish community to a re-emerging
vibrant dysfunctional Jewish community. We’re still dysfunctional, but at least now
we’re alive; we’re vibrant, we’re creating. Today, there are once again Jewish
communities in nearly all of Poland’s larger towns and cities. Optimistic
estimates say the country is now home to up to 12 practicing Jews. This
renaissance has led to a growing demand for kosher food. Today,
Rabbi Schudrich is visiting three businesses catering to that
demand. We’re only welcome to film in one: the
Pravda vodka distillery. -The production line first — or the office?
-Production! Jewish dietary laws divide foodstuffs into
kosher and non-kosher. The Chief Rabbi checks production for
compliance. Certain additives, such as pork-based gelatin,
are not permitted. -It happens to be that today they’re
doing a production for Israel. ‘Cause it’s not always the stickers in Hebrew.
So you can see: all these stickers are in Hebrew because
it’s going to Israel. After inspection, the firm is given
an international kosher certificate. Vodka is a popular drink
during the Passover festival. -So, this here, you see, has someone
actually signed in Hebrew by our kosher supervisor. It’s with a lock here and here
and here and here. So we know that when we come back to the Passover production
that it really is from that alcohol. Most of the kosher vodka
is for export, with only a fraction
staying in Poland. -How important is this market
for you to have a kosher product? -Passover, you mean? For Passover
products the main market is Israel. Also we produce and sell this product to
United States and to Republic of South Africa. Also some amounts we produce
and sell to Poland. And still we are trying to raise our market for kosher Passover
vodka and also for other kosher products. -So at least a share you are
selling in Poland, which means there is a market of
Jewish people who . . . -Very small.
-It’s not a big community if you think about Polish Jewish people. But I think
the most of the people who don’t know that their roots are from the Jewish community.
So I think this is still in progress to have and to get the information
about their roots and their generations. -Very well said. -I’m very happy that I wasn’t the
only Jew who wanted to live as a Jew in Poland. Otherwise it would have
been a little bit lonely. But if those Jews eventually decide — and some do —
that they want to live their Jewish lives elsewhere, it’s their free choice.
We’re not making a religion out of Jews in Poland. It’s not an obligation, but it
certainly is a right, and it gives me also a private satisfaction. We’re hard to
kill, and I would like to keep it that way. -Here’s another kosher certificate. I
know the firm is just getting it renewed. -And this is the confirmation for kosher
distillation. Excellent. Thank you. I hope I haven’t caused you
too many headaches. And the rabbi
leaves with a present. -Very important: It’s
kosher for Passover! So far, our impressions have
been positive. But Jewish-Gentile encounters don’t
always run this smoothly. Relations with the Polish government
have been strained recently. The right- wing nationalist government introduced
legislation in 2018 that caused deep offense to Jewish sensibilities. It made
it illegal to suggest that the Polish state or people were in any way complicit in
the Holocaust, perpetrated by the Nazis. -It basically was to defend the good
name of Poland; that Poland shouldn't be blamed for things that they didn't do.
But there was then a great concern: But there were Poles that did bad things.
And how are we going to deal with that? And more importantly was the
problem that the reaction . . . There were hurtful statements. There were
hurtful statements made by some Poles. There were hurtful statements
made by some Jews. Protests met with a wave of anti-Semitic
rhetoric in the media and on the Internet. -The bill was controversial. On the one
hand, Poles feel insulted when the press in Europe or the international media
refer to the German concentration camps as Polish death camps. It hurts
the Poles. You have to understand that. The Polish people themselves
suffered during the Second World War. Six million of them died, almost 25 percent
of the Polish nation. This legacy of the Second World War is embedded
in the consciousness of generations of Poles -- to this day. After all they
suffered, they are extremely sensitive to claims that the Poles were responsible for
the existence of the death camps in Poland. -At the end, it was an unnecessary
problem that has more or less . . . is no longer. People remember it; but
it’s no longer a wound, it’s a scar. When international Jewish organizations
protested, Warsaw held discussions with the Israeli government, and the
legislation was watered down. Rabbi Schudrich played a mediating
role. But he prefers to focus on the positive
aspects of life in Poland. For instance, that Poland is represented
by people like Dariusz Popiela, a young kayaker who has competed for the
country at the Olympic games. Popiela is as busy as the Chief Rabbi, but he
still finds time to get involved in the restoration of Jewish cemeteries — like
the one in Grybów in southern Poland. For years, the cemetery
was completely neglected. -We’re going to try and improve things
here. First, I’ll launch an appeal on Facebook. We already have
permission. I’ve been busy, and otherwise I’d have come to get
this fixed up much sooner. Popiela wanted to clear the cemetery
of weeds and restore its former dignity. Several months and a lot of hard
work later, it’s re-opening. There’s a new memorial plaque listing the Jewish
residents of this small village who were killed by the Nazis. For Rabbi
Schudrich, the commitment of these volunteers is
especially appreciated. -With our presence here we express
our memory ... The Jewish Book of Life of the Grybów region was closed after
several centuries in August 1942. On the 20th of August the Nazis
started the Reinhardt-Operation. I would like to ask Chief Rabbi of Poland
Michael Schudrich to say a few words. -On the one hand, my heart is broken.
On the other hand, I’m very happy today. It’s broken because the Jewish
people of Grybów were killed simply because they were Jewish. I
would like to thank our mayor for his words. He said that we must oppose
anger; we must oppose hatred when it is still small, and before it has spread.
... At the same time, my heart is happy. Who would have thought, when the
war ended seventy-four years ago, that respect would be shown to the dead
in this Jewish cemetery once again; that the mass graves would be
marked ... and remembered? In 1942 the Nazi regime finalized plans
to exterminate the entire Jewish population of Europe. As in Grybów, German troops
dissolved the ghettos in towns and cities throughout Poland. The Jews were
murdered on the spot or transported to extermination camps. Projects like
Dariusz Popiela’s try to establish the names of the victims, so
that they are not forgotten. There are initiatives like this all over
Poland. For the past thirty years, the restoration work has been focusing on
a few more towns or villages each year. Michael Schudrich considers
this one of his key tasks. Often, Relatives of the people
buried here come from overseas to visit the cemeteries —
including from the US. -Part of my family, my niece, my sister, my
brother in law, my wife is there somewhere. -The mass graves are especially
important because we talk about remembering the Holocaust, and that’s
essential. It’s an obligation of every good human being — not only Jews
and Germans. It’s an obligation of every good human being to remember what
happened in the Holocaust. But if you think about it, perhaps the first thing
we should do is to make sure that every victim of the Holocaust has a grave,
so far as that’s possible. We’ll never get close to having graves for six million
Jews, but a hundred more, thirty more, even one more, is
tremendously valuable. It’s sometimes said that
Michael Schudrich is the rabbi of both the living and
of the dead in Poland. We visit Joanna and Lukasz and their
three children: Ezra, Rema and Ninel. -Ezra was in Budapest for a student
exchange, and his English teacher was very happy when he came back, and
she was like “very good progress after this trip.” Because there was no
chance to speak Polish there. Joanna is an actress and recently
appeared in a Swedish film. Her husband Lukasz is a theater director and has
been working in Slovakia. The couple value their international contacts. Lukasz
admits that living openly as a Jew in Poland sometimes
makes him feel insecure. -What was the tragic moment after the
war in Poland was 1968. Because it was the moment half of my
family had to go out of Poland. 1968 brought further trauma to Polish
Jews. Leading Communist party figures blamed the student protests at the time
on a “Zionist plot” — triggering months of anti-Semitic incitement. Many Jews who had
survived the Shoah now fled the country. -Half of my life, I was the first person
told there is no anti-Semitism in Poland. But now I am talking to myself:
Where did you have your eyes and ears? -Anti-Semitism is prevalent throughout
the world. It may be worse in Poland; it may be better. But it’s prevalent. A lot
has to do with the Catholic Church. A lot has to do with just internet, hate
speech, and all these things. But the result is: in a strange way anti-Semitism
in Poland propelled more kids into our school. And a result is we
became stronger and stronger. -I wouldn’t say that all members of the
Church participate in the dialogue in the same way. I wouldn’t say that all
members of the Church are without prejudice. Maybe — actually, probably
— some are prejudiced. But these are really exceptions to the overall picture.
I’m thinking of the Second Vatican Council, which has had a direct
influence on the atmosphere in Poland and developments here. Believe me: I have the
feeling that something great is happening. The Jewish Community Center or
JCC brings together Warsaw’s five congregations. It’s Sunday. Kosher brunch
for Jews and Gentiles. The food is good, and it’s a popular meeting-place.
Parents can relax while their kids learn handicrafts. Rabbi Schudrich
is a frequent visitor here, too. Joanna Niemirska and her
children try to come every weekend. Daniel Krajewski is also here. Suffering
from Down’s Syndrome is no obstacle to becoming a fully integrated
member of the Jewish community. -It was very important to me that
I could celebrate my bar mitzvah — because I was born into a Jewish family.
At the ceremony I said two blessings in Hebrew, and after reading from the
Torah I spoke about the Exodus from Egypt. Rabbi Schudrich simplified the bar
mitzvah procedure for the young man. He has known him since he was a
child. Daniel Krajewski took part in the seminars Schudrich gave in the
1990s, when the Jewish revival began. The young Jewish community in
Poland has made great strides since its beginnings in a small village in southern
Poland thirty years ago. In the 1990s Schudrich organized seminars on
Jewish life at an education center in Rychwald. Today it’s a hotel and
guesthouse for family get-togethers. This is the rabbi’s first time
back in many years. -I have no idea. I haven’t seen these
people in fifteen, twenty years. I don’t know if I’ll recognize them. Maybe
the same lady is working here. We would have had classes over here
on the grass. Here we would sing; we would dance. We do everything,
trying in our own little safe space that people see what
Judaism is about. -It’s impossible to be Jewish in
Poland and not feel the presence of the absence. So, of course, it was a
recurrent topic in our conversations, and of course we never came up with
any extraordinary intelligent solutions to the problem
because there aren’t any. Decades after the Holocaust,
many Polish Jews had become disconnected
from their roots. -There are all these stories that there
was a time when people just realized — some of them — realized
that they were Jewish . . . -Many of them.
-Many of them, you say? -And even those who knew never had a
chance to experience; they never had a Shabbat before. Some did, but
many didn’t. And so it was really a first chance. It was also a chance just to
be openly Jewish. You know, you don’t have to worry about anybody making
a comment or wondering what it meant. In a lot of ways
it all started here. -We had a dinner at Hotel Victoria in
1989. I looked at these kids. They were not kids anymore, they were in their
thirties or forties, and I’ll never forget we were singing a song called Rozinkes
mit Mandlen — Raisins and Almonds — and we said: “We will sing a song that
your real mother may have sung to you as children. All those, a hundred, who
remember the song, please join in.” And you know: first ten, then 20, then 80
kids, 80 of the 100, were singing a song from the subconscious sung
to them by their mother they have probably never
heard before since then. A year later, in 1990, the
Lauder Foundation funded the first Jewish heritage
seminars in Rychwald. Thirty years ago, in this kitchen,
a kosher meal was prepared for perhaps the first time
since the Second World War. -At first it must have been strange for
you. What WAS kosher food, for example? -Sure, at first. But
then we got used to it. -Exactly! After the very first workshop,
they knew how to cook. The staff got to know us and they soon learned the
songs that we sang in the dining room. They also knew what happened on Friday evening
and on Saturday morning — for Shabbat. In Communist Poland, Jewish
life was an abstract concept. -Before that, I only knew what I had
seen on TV. We didn’t know better. We were anxious about it. But that all
changed when Michael came. -When children were listening to him,
speaking about what was Jewish, what was important to them, it was so
special because he related to them. He got down to their level; he spoke with
them. I saw him sitting on the floor and talk to them, reach out to them. This
was the man; this was exactly the man. We realized
he was special. Stanislaw and Monika Krajewski were two of
the first participants. They were finally able to practice their Jewish faith openly.
No need to hide and be discreet, as in the Communist era. Stanislaw
even led prayers sometimes. Many of those attending
were Holocaust survivors. -During the war, they were children; they
were not adult. Some of them were very little children or babies. Some of
them were eight or ten, and they survived either because they were hiding
somewhere or they were given to someone. Both of the Krajewskis
were born after the war. -This was very helpful to make me
more knowledgeable and to make me know how to do things regular Jews do
because this is not something I got from my family. Also this is true about
almost all people of my generation and younger. So those who live in Poland
and were Jewish in some way in the 70s or in the 80s were mostly very assimilated
and very far from Jewish involvement. -We spend here, you know, eight
weeks a year for six, seven years. The rebirth of Jewish
religious life in Poland began under somewhat
spartan conditions. -It was wonderful times,
with very warm memories. -And here — this is where
we had a little synagogue. A makeshift synagogue was set up
in an alcove of the education center. It marked a new beginning
for Judaism in Poland. -Everything from basic things of Judaism
— Shabbat, kosher, holidays, history — to what does it mean to be Jewish, how does it
feel to be Jewish. And also getting to know each other, icebreakers.
And sometimes fun things, we had everybody
re-enact a biblical scene. -And on Friday nights we would put all
the different benches we could find, and we would have the prayer
outside. This was really everyone’s favorite
moment of the week. But there was also criticism from
unexpected quarters. For some people, Jewish life in eastern Europe was
unimaginable after the Holocaust. -The fact is that Jewish people in
America — particularly people who are second generation, whose parents fled
the Holocaust — said: “Why do you want to do it?” And I said to these people,
“Because there are Jewish kids there, and we must do what we
can to give them a Jewish life.” -It is ridiculous to protest the gains
and the rebirth of Jewish life where it had been murdered. Because you don’t
regulate life. Jews have a right to live, and live as Jews, wherever they want.
If this is the only problem, then we need to get out of Europe. Europe is a
graveyard. It’s particularly visible around Auschwitz. But if anybody
with Jewish historical sensitivity travels around Europe,
it is a place of death. -And it was very painful. After this
journey back, to be said that you don’t really exist because there can’t be
Jews here, was very painful. And wrong. The seminar buildings where this Jewish
renaissance began are just an hour’s drive from the infamous
extermination camp Auschwitz-Birkenau. -And there’s another point we should
point out. When we go up this kind of bridge, you look to the left and to the
right, and you see train tracks. Lots and lots of train tracks. And you understand
why the Germans built the biggest death camp here — because you
have the crossroads of so many different train tracks from all over
Europe. That is a clear point. When you see it here, you
understand why did they build it here. -Actually, I think it gets harder to visit
this place than easier. When it really became harder? There were two
things: Once my daughter was born, so in a natural way when you walk here, you
don’t have children, you think: Could I have survived? And once you have a
child, you think: Could your child have survived? And there it becomes a
completely different experience. And the other thing for many, many Jews
it’s, I mean, it’s a horrible place for any human being to be. For Jews
it also becomes personal — because many of us
have family that was here. -Gas chamber three, Gas chamber four,
Gas chamber five. And this is the Sauna. The rabbi travels to Auschwitz-Birkenau
several times each year. Many visitors from Israel and the US ask to meet
him at the site where their relatives were murdered. He’s also a senior religious
advisor to the Auschwitz Foundation, which administers the site —
as a museum AND a memorial. Rabbi Schudrich says keeping
the memory alive is crucial. -It seems that, in Europe, the shock
of the Holocaust, of this genocide, the worst genocide in history, kind of
silenced those people who refused to learn the lesson. And it seems now,
75 years later, although many people do know the lesson, there are those who
never knew the lesson and now want to speak in a loud voice denying the
Holocaust, belittling the Holocaust. So, well, some people are saying: “No,
we’ve learnt nothing,” that’s not true. Humanity has learned a lot. It doesn’t
mean that all of humanity has learned everything. And so, even standing in
a place like this, I am hopeful. Because you just see the numbers of people
visiting today, gives hope that they will be changed when they leave.
How can you be the same person? Michael Schudrich’s uncle, an Austrian
Jew from Vienna, was a prisoner in Auschwitz. In August 1944, Henry
Starer was brought there on one of the last deportation trains from the
German concentration camp at Theresienstadt in
today’s Czech Republic. -When I saw what they did with some of
the babies on the platform of Auschwitz? They slaughtered them. They threw
them up in the air; they shot at them. They came down like birds in
front of their mother. How terrible. -This is the place where Josef Mengele
would go like this. And my uncle told me the story when they arrived on the train
from Theresienstadt.... In Theresienstadt the World War I veterans were treated
better because there was some level of Jewish self-government in
Theresienstadt — some level — but at least there the veterans were treated
better. Here they were lined up five- five-five. And they were in the same line
as some World War I veterans. Mengele sent the veterans straight to the gas
chamber, and my uncle and his brother followed immediately with them,
figuring they were going to a better place — based on their experience of
Theresienstadt. And then Mengele had his guards kick my uncle and his brother
to the other side, saying: “You, Jew, can’t decide your fate.” A Jew
couldn’t even decide to be killed. And so, ironically, Mengele saved my
uncle’s life. Which is bizarre. Henry Starer survived Auschwitz and
emigrated to the United States, where he started his own family. Michael
Schudrich learned a lot from his uncle. -My uncle was one of those who
spoke quite frequently about it. So I can’t remember if I was eleven or thirteen;
certainly by thirteen. But I can’t tell you from what age. Certainly when
I was in high school, this was something Uncle Henry
would tell me about. -How important was this for your
idea to be interested in Eastern Europe? Did this play
a role or not? -Absolutely, yes. To what extent? The
idea is that I very much took away from that, I think. I took away from
that: you can’t be indifferent. If something is wrong,
you have to try and fix it. It’s December — Christmas in
Warsaw, the capital of Catholic Poland. The Jewish community is celebrating
Hanukkah, the festival of lights. The opening event is, as
always, open to the public. Warsaw’s Jews are no longer
a clandestine community. -Simply put, it was the
place I was supposed to be. Michael Schudrich has dedicated the past
thirty years of his life to re-establishing Jewish religious life in Poland —
committed to keeping memory alive, and to working for the
present ... and the future. -It looks like it’s still the
place I am supposed to be.|||Today, I want to discover Gdańsk with you,
a port city on the Baltic coast in the north of Poland. While Gdańsk has a special meaning
not only for Poland, but for the whole of Europe. Do you want to know more?
You can't tell by looking at scenic Gdańsk You can't tell by looking at scenic Gdańsk that it's a city in Europe marked by fate.
But: We'll get to that in just a minute. With its historic center, Gdańsk is one of
the most popular city destinations in Poland. Pre-pandemic, 1.5 million tourists vacationed
here annually, mostly Germans and Scandinavians. But Poland borders Ukraine, and with the war
right next door, people are staying away. There are 60 percent fewer foreign tourists. The old port on the Motława River.  Without it, the Gdańsk of today would not exist. 
It's lined with cafés and restaurants. In the Middle Ages, it made Gdańsk
the richest city in Europe. I feel like going for a ride on the pirate ship. It casts off several times a day. This boat trip is perfect for a little break. The city is seamlessly connected to the port,
which has developed around Gdańsk over the centuries. It's the biggest port in Poland
with one of the largest repair yards in the world. For the people of Gdańsk, these cranes 
are a symbol of home. Most of them belong to the
old shipyard which is the soul of the city. Well, and not only that. This is a place 
that fundamentally changed Europe. The famous Gdańsk shipyard. Over 40 years ago, there was a strike here
by shipyard workers and with that began the decline of socialism in Poland and the end
of communism in Europe. The struggle for workers' rights gained momentum
here. Millions of Poles organized themselves in the Solidarność movement, fighting for
freedom and democracy under an authoritarian regime. The European Solidarity Centre at the former
shipyard tells this story. Right above the entrance – the Ukrainian flag. Anna Walentynowicz was a crane operator and later a founding member of the Solidarność
or Solidarity trade union. Solidarność. This worker activism turned into
an anti-communist opposition movement. It spread across the whole country. 
The authoritarian regime increased the pressure. They reached their goals with 
the principle of non-violence. Lech Wałęsa, a trained electrician and trade
union leader led Poland to independence. In 1990, he became president 
and remained so for 5 years. These activists created change
in a hopeless situation. This is what the Solidarność movement
still stands for today. You can guess what I wish for. Pax: Peace! Today, ships are no longer 
being built in the Gdańsk shipyard.  The area is still occasionally used by companies. 
Most of the production halls are empty. It's a lost place for the time being. 
But there are plans to create a new, chic urban district here based on the model of
London's Docklands or Hamburg's HafenCity. With apartments, shops, and offices.
The old shipyard area is like a huge adventure The old shipyard area is like 
a huge adventure playground,  because the investor has left
the empty spaces to artists, and now you can find galleries, rehearsal rooms, and studios here. This character looks a bit like me. We have the same nose. The gallery Mleczny Piotr. An artist collective
has found a temporary home here. The building was a factory for 170 years, where 
the people of Gdańsk had no access. Now visitors are always welcome. Great, ah, okay, it’s a magnifying glass for tools? Yeah yeah. You know what this is? 
It's from a car. - It's a lamp. 
- This a lamp from a car, yeah. There are more spots in the shipyard that
people in Gdańsk have taken over and filled with new life. The 100cnia is a container settlement 
with lots going on. Here you can be loud and party until the early morning. And you can meet cool people. On the very spot where the democracy movement 
in Poland began more than 40 years ago, life and freedom are now being celebrated. Gdańsk gives us hope that history can change for
the better at any time. I really have to say, Gdańsk is impressive.
It's not just a big city by the sea with a beach, a beautiful old town, and, well, this
really cool shipyard. In this city, you can also feel 
the history of Europe around every corner. So Gdańsk is a place you should visit.|||[Music] [Applause] first question can a poor country reasonably aspire to become a high income one within a few years second question how much time would they really need and third question how would they do it dear viewer these are some of the most common questions that you send us here on this channel we've seen in various videos how several countries have managed to change their luck and become locomotives well dear viewer in this video i want to tell you about a very particular case i want to tell you about poland because poland's becoming something of a new germany well listen up [Music] here's a question for you and as always please do not google it which do you think is the city with the most polish inhabitants warsaw maybe krakow well wrong actually it would be chicago two million polish people live in chicago yes we are really not kidding here dear viewer it's not been easy for poles during the second world war poland was the country that suffered the most no less than one out of every five poles that's almost six million people which is the conservative estimate by the way lost their lives and after that disaster they endured 44 years of a communist government who in addition to exerting an enormous amount of political repression also left them as a poor country in 1989 when this system came to an end poland's per capita income was between three and five times smaller than that of developed countries such as italy france or the united kingdom but just hold on a second because things they've really changed [Music] poland a country located halfway between paris and moscow and has 40 million inhabitants completely changed its model and since they've done this their economy has grown by over 4 every year [Music] [Applause] all right so now you might be thinking did i just put too much emphasis on four percent a year because it doesn't sound that impressive i mean this is especially if you compare it to the pretty crazy growth rates that you can see in the asian tigers four percent kind of sounds like a joke right well folks if you are thinking that you are missing a couple of important details the first is that we're talking about almost 25 years of uninterrupted economic growth here not even the great crisis of 2008 and 2009 really affected this country at all we could say that poland's moving kind of like a giant cargo ship it's not the fastest ship on the water for sure but it has moved an incredible distance [Music] put another way young polish people have pretty much no idea what an economic crisis is like [Music] the second detail is also very important here because unlike what happened with the asian tigers poland has had this huge growth while being a consolidated democracy and by the way that really kind of dispels an important myth here and that's that countries need a strong hand in order to grow well anyway thanks to this growth poland has had an amazing 25 years this country has gone from having average salaries of between 10 to 15 000 american dollars per month to having a per capita income taking into account each country's price difference that in 2018 will be higher than that of greece portugal and every latin american country and the reality is it's also not really that far behind spain or italy either but having gotten to this point i think there's a question that we really need to answer how did they achieve this well listen up because that's what we're going to talk about in today's video [Music] the end of an era for 44 years from 1945 to 1989 the socialist state of the people's republic of poland a satellite country of the soviet union was in power by the way to give you an idea of how great moscow's control was it's said that when in 1950 the polish leader boloslaw beret showed joseph staley himself a draft of the future polish constitution that the leader of the soviet union made dozens of corrections by hand which of course were taken into account anyway the polish regime was one of the least harsh in the entire soviet orbit for example most of the land wasn't collectivized the catholic church was allowed to function with relative freedom and even though political repression was high it wasn't quite as intense as it was in other countries [Music] even so of course as in any good socialist country the state controlled almost everything and in 1989 its economy completely shattered now thanks to all these small freedoms a real political opposition emerged led among others by lec valencia the leader of the independent solidarity union the first free union of all eastern european countries thanks to this when the soviet union's power began to crumble poland became the first country in eastern europe to set its political transition in motion to completely abandon communism and so on june 4th 1989 the first relatively free elections were held and with that was no turning back [Music] shock therapy just a few months after the first elections in september of 1989 the minister of finance lessek balceravits set a plan on the table to shred the entire communist fabric and replace it with a capitalist model three months later this shock therapy as it's been known was launched poland exerted a liberal program called shock therapy the idea was either the patient improves or dies from one day to the next everything was liberalized in a very rigid and centralized economy in which prices and needs had nothing to do with reality he called it the lunar economy everything was fiction piotr pineagenia olshinsky polish diplomat suddenly everything changed prices were liberalized controls were lifted people were able to set up private businesses they stopped printing money the economy began to open up to the world and a plan was launched to privatize public enterprises so within a short time not even the polls could recognize poland also the government had a very clear idea about the future poland needed to get as far away from russia as possible and strengthen its ties with the rest of europe and the united states so was the result of all of this well a few years later they joined both the european union and nato now what model do you think the country has followed since then [Music] [Music] change of course now we've already told you plenty of times the world is getting better poverty is decreasing and countries are getting richer but despite this belonging to the club of rich countries is still a difficult mission even so everything points to poland achieving this within a very short amount of time dear viewer this country is becoming eastern europe's germany [Music] [Applause] see poland has become an industrial powerhouse flooded with multinationals and like in germany its small and medium-sized companies have begun to cross the border the result since 1989 its foreign trade has multiplied by more than 25. polish exports amount to almost 200 billion dollars per year which represents more than 40 percent of the country's gdp which is a seriously high number [Music] this simply explains why polish roads are full of trucks so now you must be wondering well how are they achieving all of this what on earth is the key to their success well dear viewer take note here the polish recipe has four main ingredients first the establishment of institutions that attract a lot of foreign investment legal security property rights ease of setting up companies and competition for example 14 special economic zones have been created where any interested company can gain many advantages second strict controls of public accounts poland's government is one of the most healthy in the european union public debt for example is barely 50 percent of the gdp and almost as importantly since 1989 they have been set on fighting inflation so no printing bills to finance the government basically the opposite of countries like argentina [Music] third quality education you heard that right poland has managed to make their educational system work and they've done it without wasting huge amounts of money its rate of university students is higher than the average of the european union 9 out of 10 young people complete secondary education and according to international studies the polish education system is one of the 10 best not just in europe but in the whole world [Music] and fourth there's moderate taxes for example companies are taxed 19 while small companies are taxed 15. and income tax breaks down into two brackets 18 for the first 24 000 and 32 for the rest [Music] and in addition because poland is a fairly conservative country families have even more advantages so if we take into account both personal taxes and pension payments poland is the fourth oecd country where families pay less direct taxes [Music] so it's with these four ingredients that poland has managed to become eastern europe's germany an export and industrial power with a healthy government and a quality of life that just keeps on growing the best proof of this is perhaps that within a few years the great power of the east has gone from being a country of immigrants to a country of immigrants [Music] from a country of immigrants to a country of immigrants in recent years if something has characterized the polish economy it's the simple availability of work unemployment is approaching six percent and many companies are beginning to have a problem finding workers initially foreign companies would only look for highly experienced employees with titles now they take everyone and give them a month of training if necessary roman polik entrepreneur and of course if companies need a lot of workers and can't find them while wages go up the average gross salary in the first quarter of 2018 was 7.1 percent higher than in the same period in 2017. average gross salary exceeds 1400 per month the central statistics office of poland and you know what this situation has led to well first many young poles who until recently left on mass to richer european union countries now are deciding to stay [Music] and second in recent years more than two million ukrainians have settled in poland especially young people looking for better opportunities than the ones they could find in their country of origin this means that poland now has more people arriving than leaving [Music] now as we always say visualpolitik not everything is so great poland is facing quite a serious aging problem and the law and justice party a very nationalist and very conservative party won every recent election and now controls the country some of their decisions have caused the european union to threaten poland with sanctions and even suspend their rights as a member but that's something we're going to address in a future video now it's your turn do you think poland would be a good example for cuba or would the chinese model actually be better well leave your answer in the comments section below as well as in this survey and i really hope you enjoyed that video if you did please don't forget to subscribe to our channel for brand new videos also do not forget to check out our friends at the reconsider media podcast they provided the vocals in this episode they were not mine and as always thank you for watching [Music] [Music]|||Growing up in the US I had the impression that
Polish people were everywhere. And now that I live in Poland I wonder how
much my fellow Americans know about the great country. So on today’s episode of Kult America
I'm interviewing everyday americans to see just what they know about Poland. What do you know about the country of Poland? Not very much. Not much. Not much, unfortunately. We're making a street survey, I just want
to ask like three questions about the country of Poland. Oh I don't know anything about the country
of Poland. I've never been to Poland, so... I can't really say. Not much. No, have you ever heard of Poland before? What did you hear? World War II stuff. Okay. That's basically it. Do you know who invaded Poland in the WWII? Was that France? I know Hitler invaded Poland, under false
pretense, they say. During WWII it was taken over by Russia, and.. I won't say his name right but
Wałęsa kinda was the one who, I would say, helped to break
the barrier of that oppression, and kinda make it the free state again,
I guess it's own country again. Saint John-Paul II is from Poland, Kraków. We’ve got Thaddeus Kościuszko’s House. That’s over.. Is that Third and Pine? Thadeusz’s House? And then we have Polish-American museum. That's right! On Third one, yeah. He helped to win in the battles of Saratoga,
and handled West point. Could you say that he's an american hero,
a Polish-American hero? Oh yeah, absolutely, of course. Do you know what kind of food
people eat in Poland? Polish food. You know I'm not positive,
they're maybe the pierogi people, and I'm not sure whether they
would be also kielbasy and things like that
but good stuff. Oh, wow, they... Man. I can tell you Czech and Slovakia. And what language do people speak in Poland? I don't know, English? Have you had any interactions
with Polish people? No. What continent is Poland on? That's easy. Oh that's in Europe. West of Russia, East of Germany. I know that it has a long history of both
having been.. It's gotta strong catholic background, gotta
lot of strong cultural elements. It's been subject of military invasions because it's so flat so it's easy for people
to come from either side, but nonetheless culturally people in Poland
have a very strong sense if their self-value. I actually don't know a lot about Poland. I'd like to know more about it. So to the best of my knowledge it seems that
Poland is kind of irrelevant place for the majority of Americans. Some people were a little bit nervous and
I think reserved to talk about obvious things they knew about the country, but generally
speaking the conclusion I can come to is that Poland simply does not matter for everyday
people here in America. Anyways, I asked people to give a message
to the people of Poland in this video. And now I would like to ask the people in
Poland to give a message to America in the comment section. If you have any thoughts or feelings on America
in terms of how they view you, let me know in the comments. Thank you so much for watching Kult America
and I will see you next time. Sorry I don't know as much about you guys,
as you probably know about America, but I'll be better with it. All love here though. No disrespect Peace around the world. Peace to everybody, especially to the people in Poland. Poland's been a very brave country,
dealt with communism and the thread and Russian
or Soviet invasion and responses. I'm glad you guys support the world.|||We start in Krakow. It's like the Boston of Poland,
a charming and vital city buzzing with history,
college students and tourists. Even though Poland's
political capital moved from here to Warsaw
400 years ago, Krakow remains the country's cultural
and intellectual Center. The city's history is rich,
its sights are fascinating, and the prices are some
of Europe's lowest. This is a country where
 the most expensive cafe on the most
expensive perch serves drinks for a fraction
 of what you'd expect. The charm of today's Krakow
lies in its medieval roots. Krakow grew wealthy from trade
in the 12th century. Traders passing through were
required to stop for a few days and sell their goods
at a discount. Local merchants then resold
their wares at a profit and the city thrived. In the 13th century the 
Tartars -- a.k.a. the Mongols -- swept in from Asia
 and destroyed Krakow. Resilient Krakovians
took this opportunity to rebuild their city with
 a near-perfect grid plan, a striking contrast to the
 narrow, maze-like lanes of most medieval towns. Eventually Krakow's
power waned. Warsaw emerged
as the dominant city in Poland and Krakow became
a provincial backwater of the Habsburg Empire
ruled from Vienna. While Warsaw was
in the sphere of Moscow and, therefore, more Eastern
and conservative, Krakow has long been
more Western and liberal.|||This is the largest protest in Poland since the fall of communism
more than 30 years ago. Hundreds of thousands are protesting,
in cities across the country, because the party in power here is on the verge
of eliminating a woman’s right to an abortion. At the heart of these protests are young women: those who are the most
threatened by the new ruling. But there are many, many others too. And that’s because these protesters
aren’t just concerned about the future of abortion rights in Poland. They’re worried about the future
of the country itself. In the late 1980s, Poland got rid
of its decades-long communist regime.   Soon, it became a thriving democracy,
with a strong catholic identity. It also passed one of the strictest laws on abortion in all of Europe. Under the law, women were only allowed 
to have an abortion under three circumstances: if the pregnancy was a threat
to the health of the mother, if it was the result of incest or rape, or if the fetus had severe
and irreversible abnormalities. The law has remained this way
for nearly 30 years.  And today, it makes Poland an outlier in Europe, where virtually every other country allows 
abortions under a broad range of circumstances. But some in Poland thought
those strict laws still weren’t enough. In 2015, Poland elected the right-wing party
Law and Justice into power. Shortly after, the party leader said: "Very close to the totalitarian way of thinking, as far as women's health, women's rights,
and women's personhood is concerned." In 2016, the party backed legislation 
to eliminate all three legal paths to abortion.  The legislation proposed imprisoning
women seeking abortions, and doctors who performed them,
for up to five years. They would even investigate miscarriages. "This is something that is incredible, you know? It really turns us back to the Middle Ages. The limitation of human rights went far too far." Thousands of women took to the streets, pushing back against the law,
in what were called the Black Protests. In the face of this opposition,
the legislation was withdrawn. Poland would still have one of the strictest abortion laws in Europe,  but not a total ban. But instead of giving up on the abortion ban, Law & Justice started dismantling
the country’s ability to oppose one. In Poland’s democracy,
some legislation passed by Parliament is sent to the Constitutional Tribunal, to ensure it’s consistent
with the country's constitution. This court has 15 judges, and it serves
as the main check on the ruling party. It’s supposed to function as an independent
branch of the government.  But upon taking power, Law & Justice
started to erode that independence. They refused to swear in several judges who had been appointed
by the previous government, and replaced them with judges
who would be loyal to them, including the Tribunal president, who has the ability to determine
which judges hear what cases. And of the judges they have appointed legally,
many are actually fellow politicians, further compromising
the independence of the court. This has created a tribunal in which
14 of 15 judges are aligned with the ruling party.  And the legitimacy of several
of them is widely disputed, both in Poland and internationally. This version of the court has never
decided a case against the ruling party. "The fact that this Constitutional Tribunal
is acting on the behalf of the political party is just the opposite of what
the Constitutional Tribunal should do." It was under these circumstances
that Law & Justice sought a new ruling from the Constitutional Tribunal
on the country’s abortion laws, that would eliminate one of the three bases
for legal abortion: Severe fetal abnormalities. And while it might seem like that
would only prevent some abortions, fetal abnormalities are the reason
for 98% of abortions in Poland. In other words, without
technically banning abortions, the change would make them
virtually impossible. Nearly 80% of Poles
disagreed with this change. But on October 22nd, the Constitutional
Tribunal ruled in its favor: That the overwhelming majority of abortions
in Poland were unconstitutional. The ruling brought Poles back into the streets, and in much bigger numbers than in 2016. "These protests are really different from
what we've seen for the last four years, because there are thousands and thousands
of young people attending these protests, organizing these protests, and also, these are the most grassroots, 
independent protests that we've ever had." In the face of the protests,
the government has delayed taking the steps that would make the ruling official. As of this video, it’s unclear when,
or if, they will. But these protests are as much about
how this ruling came together, as they are about the ruling itself. MARTA LEMPART: "It started with abortion.
Now we fight for freedom, for everything." For the rule of law." Outside of Poland, the world has noticed.  International organizations have stopped considering it a full democracy. And the changes to its legal system have put
Poland’s European Union membership at risk. 30 years ago, Poland enthusiastically
embraced democracy. Today, its ruling party is trying to rig the
country’s democratic institutions in its favor. And it's the people
who are fighting to protect them. "Despite the fact that this government
is responsible for destroying all the democratic tools
that we have in our Constitution, you still have the nation,
the citizens in this country, who carry on the democratic values."|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Do you remember that
container ship, the Ever Given, that got stuck in the
Suez Canal back in 2021? The final report
into what happened came out a few months ago,
as I record this, and there were a lot of
things that went wrong. It was travelling too fast, there were communications
problems between the crew and the local pilots, and there was the
bank effect. There are two ways
to learn what that is. You can get the
theoretical explanation that big ships get
sucked to the sidewalls by pressure differences when travelling
at speed along canals. But if that seems
a bit abstract, you can learn it hands-on. Because this is the Port Iława Ship Handling
Research and Training Centre in the north of Poland. And this is one of the places where the folks who
steer those big ships learn how to do it. Just to be clear, I'm not
getting a full training course. That takes days
and includes a huge amount of theory work
and study as well. I'm just going to drive a
miniature container ship for a lap around
the lake, and... hopefully not get it
stuck in the Suez Canal. We have started our
training activity in 1980. In the '90s, we have moved from
the old lake towards this one, and practically first training
here was realized in 1991, more or less 30 years ago. We are performing
training in ship handling. We have a lot of
different mockups presenting
different waterways. Everything was built using
exactly the same scale, 1:24. Deep waters,
shallow waters, different restrictions,
rivers, canals. And what is more important? Of course, ship models. Permission to come aboard? Granted.
(laughs) Okay. This is bigger than I thought
it was going to be. It's one of the
biggest in the world. 400 metre ship. 400 metre? Scaled down 1:24,
that's still... 16 and a half. That's— Okay,
this is big, cool. We can proceed.
Dead slow ahead. So dead slow ahead?
Yep. And steady as she goes.
Forward. I assume that means just
keep it going straight, okay. These are the
tugboat simulators. Oh, I don't feel
guilty about you... You've taken
the controls here. I'd be on tugboats going out. I was meant to be asking
all sorts of questions here, and I'm just slightly nervous
about driving a tiny boat. It's not a tiny boat. It's a 400m container ship. Yep. So you have
controls there that simulate the effect
of tugs on the boat. Right, four tugs. You may make a
rather hard to port. Hard to port? I don't know why... but I thought I was
going to spin that like the wheel of a
pirate ship, and it's just a...
Yeah. Alright, so
what's our plan now? Okay, so now we can go
through the lock if you like. Yeah, absolutely. Basically we go that direction,
south of the island. I feel like I need
to go left here. Yeah, make it port 10.
Port, not left. We have had, in our history, more than 6,000 pilots,
masters, and chief officers from more than 50 countries. On average, 220–230 a year. We have beginners, but we have also very
experienced masters. Because the lock
is very shallow... Yeah.
We will have only 2cm of water
under the keel. If we have too high a speed,
we touch the bottom. So the faster I go
in shallow water, the more the boat is going to
get sucked down to the ground. More squat
you have, yeah. We have to come
in line with the lock. Oh!
Sooner we do that, more time we have to apply
any correction if necessary. That is such a tight
spot to navigate through. Hard to starboard
for a while. Hard to star—
Starboard, starboard. The minute I feel like
I've got this... It's all going to fall apart. Uh, midships? Yes, please.
Yep. And starboard— yep.
Starboard 20. And midships, yep. Oh, I think I've
overcorrected there! There's some very strong work being done by the
tugboats here, thank you. We have no clearance here! I feel like starboard slightly? Yeah, starboard 20.
Starboard 20. (winces) I can't see how
close we are there. Did we clear that?
Yes. I think we cleared that.
Yes! (wheezes) Again,
solid tugboat work. Midships, surely. Starboard 20.
Okay! The basic training
program takes five days. A linear scale, 1:24, means that timescale is equal
to more or less five. It means everything happens five times faster
than in reality. And feeling for a ship
may be affected. It's a disadvantage. But on the other hand,
five days of training will correspond to 25 days
of training in reality. Hard to starboard.
Hard to starboard. I'm more the helmsman
than the captain at this point, thank you. Hard to port again. Hard to port.
Left hand down a bit! Okay, I think we
can make half ahead. Half ahead. We are clear of the lock. Oh, yeah. Phew! Full ahead.
Full ahead! (both laughing) Did I need to slam that
forward so dramatically? Absolutely not, but... Our first models
were really very simple. Nothing inside. Just wheel,
engine telegraph, and that's it. And step by step... we have started to add
different facilities. We have electronic navigation. It means a very precise
GPS system, which allows to measure a
given ship model trajectory with precision equal to
one, maybe two centimetres. Suddenly the nerves
have gone. Open ocean. Open lake. Starboard 10.
Starboard 10. 'Cause you've
got to cancel out what you've just given it, right?
Yeah. We're still going
quite strongly to port just because that input from...
The wind. Ages ago, and the wind?
Due to the wind, yeah. I'm amazed how much
the wind is affecting this. You have to imagine
that such a ship, fully loaded, has about 20,000
square metres with the windage area. (heavy sigh) Everything during
exercises is measured, sent to our classroom,
and in case of problems, we can discuss step by step, and we can show where
mistakes were made. Ooh! ...I'm sorry, I got
distracted by a cormorant. (both chuckle) Current, especially in
the case of shallow water, is a big problem. It means we have
current generators. This current velocity can be
changed according to our needs. (metal colliding) I thought we hit something. Oh, we did.
That's me, sorry. No problem.
(nervous chuckle) It's not like this thing
has rear-view mirrors. Okay, half ahead. Half ahead? We're sailing a
massive container ship down the Suez Canal. Do I need to put a little
bit of rudder in here? Yeah, it's fine. Now you
have to go behind Varta. Right.
You can make a port 10. Port 10, got it. I think we're clear
of the red buoy. Midship.
Midships. (winces)
No, no, it's clear. Okay. Port 20.
Port 20. Midships.
Midships. Okay. And a full ahead. Full ahead, okay! Starboard 20.
Starboard 20. Because we've got to
ease out the turn. Then you will start
feeling the bank effect from the starboard wall. Okay. Hard to starboard. So it feels like
I could go midships now. We should just go straight
down the middle of this canal. Except... The bank effect,
you see, bow is coming out. It means the repulsion
force pushes the bow. Now you have to make
a hard to starboard. Hard to starboard.
Gah, yeah! I'm being sucked
towards the port wall! I'm putting full
right lock on here. Midships.
Midships, okay. You see, again, it's coming. Yep... it is! So we have to make
hard to starboard. Hard to starboard, yeah,
if I don't do hard to starboard— You would have hit this wall.
Yeah. I'm absolutely gonna
ram that if we're not careful. Yeah. That's so powerful!
Midships. Yep. Yeah, hard to starboard.
Hard to starboard. I was midships. We should have been
going straight ahead. And I think...
I think... I have to help you
with that task. Yeah, you're going
to have to help with that. I should've done that earlier. Everybody down. Clear.
Oh, cleared?! Midship. Hard to port now.
(bewildered laugh) Hard to port. You were lucky,
one inch clear. That was more luck than
good judgment, that was! Our research is focused
on ship handling. It means interaction
forces, and... autonomous ships. We have started realisation of
research programs three or four years ago,
because... autonomous ships
will be really very popular. We need at least
ten ships' lengths... Yeah.
...to stop the ship. Ten ships' lengths? And that harbour is here. Oh, I definitely need
to put some port in. Yes. Hard to port.
Port 20. Hard to port, okay. Everything in case
of our training centre is realised in real conditions. You can feel very well
wind, you can feel very well
current, and everything what deals
with weather conditions. Such a situation
does not happen in case when using
computer simulators. And... especially
pilots coming to our training centre for training
prefer very often to use models instead of
computer simulation. Every driver's
instinct in me is going, "I can just slam it in reverse.
Take it 'round, it'll be fine." No, it won't.
That's not how this works. Collisions really occur
at our training centre. The main difference regarding
computers and our models is in computers,
in case of problems, you can switch off everything, and you can restart
everything. That's okay. In the case of our
training centre, the only one thing
to do is to... call technical staff
for rescue tugs. And quite often,
our models are sent directly from the training
centre to our "shipyard" for different repairing works. And this psychological
effect influences very much the
level of education. People realise everything
a little bit differently when comparing with
computer simulators. Alright, we are home.
(sighs) That was a privilege.
Thank you very, very much. I know very few
people get to do that. You're welcome, no problem.
So thank you so much. Here, every
instructor can do that (laughs)
...very easily. [Caption+ by JS*
caption.plus | @caption_plus] There is one thing
I forgot to ask. Can I push the whistle
button, please? (blare) Thank you! (laughs)|||What's up everybody I'm Alex aka Alex
The Vagabond you're watching Vagabrothers and right now I am in
Poland in Warmia and Masuria a beautiful Lake District in the northern
part of the county. I'm here exploring with the polish tourism organization and I am extremely excited to explore this country that I've never been to. Marko has taken a vacation back in California so I'm bringing my fiance Carrie Rad
along for the ride. Let's go! All right everybody well welcome to
Lidzbark Warminski This city was once the
capital of the region of Warmia It was founded in the mid-1300s and this is the castle of the Bishop. It was ruled by a Bishop,  the Bishop of Warmia for over 500 years until the mid-1800s The castle was built
in the Gothic style but this was the private chapel for the Bishop and the
people who lived in the castle and it was redecorated in the mid 1700s in the
Rococo style which is just ostentatious and elaborate and luxurious and to be
honest I have never been in a house of worship as beautifully decorated as this. Also, fun fact if you're coming to Poland and you want to get married you can rent
this place This is the most stunning Catholic
Church I have ever been in in my life it's definitely a nostalgic feeling
being in here I grew up In Catholic school so I went to Mass every single
Friday when I was young and it's just beyond anything I have ever seen before
it is so decadent and just stunning gold trimming on absolutely everything and it
just feels really a peaceful in here I think my mom would really love this
place So we've left the town of Lidzbark Warminski and we have come here to the palace of Galiny which is not
only a palace, it's also a farm it's also a restaurant which has won some awards
for their cuisine We're starting things off with some polish dumplings and a nice spring salad most of which grown here on the property but we didn't just
come here to eat we're here to learn how to ride horses now it's not the first
time that we've ridden horses but let's be honest how often do you get the
chance to polish up your equestrian skills probably not that often so we're
gonna ride some horses but first, it's time to eat. How do I say cheers in
Polish? Riding horses is by no means a simple
thing these beautiful beasts are sentient they know what we're doing they
know what we're not doing and when you do not have equestrian skills like
myself it can become quite a challenge The trot, especially difficult but once
you figure it out once you get your practice going and you have a great
horse it starts to flow a little bit let's go I'm not gonna lie it has been quite a
long time since I was last on a horse when I was growing up I loved horses so
thank you to Palac Galiny for allowing me to kind of relive that thank you to
Alabama for being such a good girl and and teaching me the ropes again quite
literally. In this modern world that we live in, we lose connection with natural pace you know everybody talks about how many horsepower are in their cars or in
a motorcycle but this is the original horsepower it's only one but it's great
and trust me it is the most powerful experience in the natural world I think
that these animals along with dogs Two the best most loyal creatures As much as I would love to ride Alabama to the next destination unfortunately that's not
quite possible so I'm gonna take you back to the barn all right babe let's go
come on let's go Alabama. well it doesn't get much more
quintessentially rural than this we are on a horse-drawn carriage going through
the Polish countryside here at Palace Galiny, they have over 350 hectares of land there are farms there's rolling grass
you can ride horses you can hike you can ride bikes you can also stay here you
could stay at the palace which was built in the 16th century or over at the newer
accommodation they have over 60 horses honestly this is really really nice I
think that as people and society continues to urbanize part of a part of
our soul is begging to be back in the countryside it feels a million miles
away from the city and the hectic city life that most of us live so I'm loving
it and I highly recommend if you get a chance you come out and try for yourself Alright well we have made it to a new
town it's called the Mikolajki and it's also on a lake but we are hopping
on a boat to do things a little bit different it's lunchtime and we're gonna
switch it up we're gonna take a boat to a restaurant
in the middle of the lake renowned for its fresh fish each day fishermen bring
their catches to the restaurant and then you eat it on the water it's gonna be
super rad let's check it out Once again we are going from one Lake to another via canal I love how the forest just comes like right up to the lakes
edge and many of the islands in these lakes are actually nature preserves. Overall I think the most surprising thing about Poland to me is that the
people are really all about enjoying life because we're in an area that is
filled with lakes filled with things to do in the outdoors the locals are all
out sailing taking boats around to have lunch and just enjoying the sunshine
we've just been really lucky this trip and I'm loving going from boat to boat
and there's really no better place to be with the Sun is out
shining like this so I'm enjoying it. We have arrived here to Barca restaurant and it's absolutely beautiful it's a
floating restaurant that you can only get to by boat specializing in
freshwater fish caught from the lake every morning the fishermen bring the fish
here this place is the perfect cherry on top of a nice Polish summer afternoon we
have two different types of Lake fish in front of us with Zander and a Burbot
we've got some french fries and some coleslaw / like pickled cucumbers
ice-cold beer right on the water. I don't think you could ask for much more, cheers. Well it's been an awesome afternoon on
the water but it's time to hop off the boat and head to our hotel which just so
happens to be right there Wow! Well, ladies and gentlemen, we are putting
the cherry on top of an incredible day we're at the Hotel Mikolajki, a
five-star hotel right on the lake incredible views right out in front of
us the city of Mikolajki behind us illuminated by the sunset and I'm just
feeling really happy I'm feeling a ton of gratitude right now coming to a part
of Europe that I never even knew existed to a country I had never visited before
and getting to do it with my fiancee Carrie this has just been such an incredible experience and I feel even happier that
I get to share it with all of you back home so I think it's time for me to put
the camera down be present enjoy this sunset enjoy this
moment and check in with you all tomorrow so have a good night Alright ladies and gentlemen welcome to
Kosova Gorne, we are at a research facility for the Polish Academy of
Sciences dedicated to researching the Cervid family. The servant family you may better know as the deer family. There are five different species of Cervids here in Poland and this beautiful place is dedicated to better understanding
those animals so there are over 500 animals on a hundred hectares of land
here and we are going to meet some of the scientists who are dedicating their
lives to better understanding these creatures and if we're lucky maybe get
some good Instagram photos.  Let's go! So welcome on the research station of
Polish Academy of Sciences this is also a deer farm when you can observe how
these animals behave. This is not typical deer, Gabby,
she's a Red Deer hind. She was hand-raised because of the human activity who
stole her from the forest. If I raised her I've also become her mother and I have a  responsibility for her whole life. How are you feeling Carrie? Can I live here with you? It's hard work. I don't care. It's a beautiful thing that you have a connection to her like that What to learn from these animals? They are social and if they are social they are close to us we are also 
social species they are very sad when they are alone they cannot be alone Pretty incredible this is it first for
me I've never been this close nor touched a deer but Gabbi super nice. I think that coming here and being able to walk with the deer and hang out with a
deer there's a whole new understanding of these animals and I think that that
in itself also just shows how close of a connection we can have with animals and
how we actually are animals as well I think in this modern-day and age with
technology and cars and airplanes we kind of forget that we are a part of the
world not apart from the world so coming here is just a nice little reminder of
that To be honest I'm pretty sad that this
trip is ending it's kind of a bittersweet ending it's been
so fun it's been such an eye-opening experience exploring this corner of
Europe one that I had never visited before I had never visited Poland before
and Warmia- Masuria,  in particular, has just blown me away I didn't know that
this nature existed here I didn't know that these lakes existed the forests the
people the culture it's all been such a pleasant surprise and one that quite
honestly I'll never forget I've had such a great time exploring Poland with Carrie
and getting to share it all with you has just made it that much more meaningful
so if you're looking for your next European vacation an off the beaten path
destination then I highly recommend you come and visit Poland and if you can
make it to Warmia and Masuria and follow some of the recommendations that
we gave you in this video So huge thank you to the Polish Tourism Organization for making this trip possible it's been such a great experience if you need more
information for planning your visit to Poland
check out their website in the description box of this video if you
enjoyed the video you know what to do give it a big thumbs up share it with
your travel buddies hit that subscribe with notifications enabled make sure you
check out Carrie's channel check out my personal channel as well and as we
always say stay curious keep exploring and we will see you on the road. Peace|||hello everyone my name is clara and together with my friend anya we have created this channel to spread information about international mobility and generally about the topic of living abroad today we are happy to introduce you two of our friends lee and luna who are currently living working and studying in warsaw they are originally from south korea and we have approached them to talk a little bit about their experiences of living in poland but we also talk about some societal aspects such as beauty standards or working culture the interview was recorded in january 22 and we're very happy to finally show it to you guys anyway we hope you enjoyed this interview my name is lee and i'm from south korea i'm currently studying international relations at the university of bursa bachelor i'm 26 in korean age i'm 24 in international you have a different way of measuring the age basically you're one year old when you're born and also every year you're getting one year regardless of your birthday or warning that i just have a lot of negative experiences as well and put it out there you know just in case somebody will really want to know how things actually are great experiences as well i think i met a lot of great people a lot of great places to go to to spend your time with your friends i think it's in general the country to study so hi i'm yuna i'm also from south korea and i'm turning 26 what else i am currently working for international company i arrived october 2020 so it's been less than one and a half years so far how about chile how long are you 18 2018 it's been like almost four years now there's a long story but i'll just keep with the third version you know i'm supposed to study in america right because i went to high school there i actually got accepted to the university i got my student visa then f1 you know i paid all the fees and then the plan just kind of kind of got changed i came to europe for like a month and you know i just decided that it might not be to study in europe as well and the tuition was like 10 times cheaper so you know i just thought it might be more economic not a bad choice because you know i've always wanted to live in europe and i really got experience with this european culture yeah actually that's a good question because whenever i meet and get to know some polish people they're really curious if i had any option like personal option to choose a country for poland specifically the first year like i worked for korean teams under multinational companies they desperately needed korean native that's why i was able to be in poland in my first year long story short i haven't had any choice but after one year i also had another option to relocate and transfer to local polish team i spontaneously decided to transfer i think my second year is my choice my first year not at all honestly i still remember looking at the policy culture for the first time i think i was really impressed it's magnificent in like uh the structure of it how big it is really i think poland is one of the countries which is quite undervalued especially from korean the first impression of russo poland was much above my expectation i really like enjoying living and working here compared to where i have been for my entire life in korea way more developed country than i expected especially itself is really far from their type of poet it's really developed full of like skyscrapers it's very advanced city i'd say the old town i think it was um really impressive and you know it was pretty european looking it was nothing like what i've seen before in my life you surprised me which is pretty small and something's very normal to you guys but i was shocked when the door was opening on top like this depending on when you position your uh the doorknob i was like did i break the door food is mainly kind of bland there there's not like certain outstanding tastes that i can feel but you know once i'm used to and know how to enjoy that kind of like blend taste i think i like it and then now probably i will feel kind of awkward or i will feel korean food will be too much because normally korean food cooks a lot of a lot of spices we're only attracted by very strong peas i think i need to find the balance well my favorite was because they had a lot of meat and you know the sauce was pretty great and tasty like yuna said don't say the food in poland plain but that dish has a lot of flavor to it and also like uh one of those pierogies with cheese in it for the potato and also the the goat cheese that you can get from the christmas market i think they're very stringy when you chew on it the cranberry sauce is quite nice actually i saw the post about how polish people think about polish food what made me interested was general polish people think only like mom's homemade polish food is a real polish but is it correct yes that the food of your mom tastes the best that's for sure oh my gosh yeah purple i'm pretty sure lee also experienced like christmas dinner i mean it was amazing like as you know i was in shock with 12 other quizzes some of the like foods were very casual so that i can easily try in most of polish restaurants in russo but there are also like very unique poison that i've never ever tried i like it but overall they're like blend but i like it don't get me wrong i like blend paste right now for me christmas is kind of like spend with your friends uh your loved ones not with your family so they were just kind of a little boring because i don't like them gatherings you know you gotta be very polite as stuff it wasn't for me we don't really do anything special uh except we have a lot of decorations out in the public but i think we spend it with our friends or you know love homes and then all the restaurants were small everything are open probably it's the peak season most of people especially young generations come out of house they are more willing to spend christmas and celebrate with so many parties and events rather than with family which is not really good at some point i think like christmas in poland like that all the relatives families can reunite under those kind of a small religious procedure with a little bit of praying it's a good you know measure like to reunite all the family members together because in korea we don't have those kind of procedures at all for christmas yeah but we have chuseok and youngjae instead i think my obsession well korean food is kind of high i've got to have it trying all of the korean restaurants wherever i go in poland it's really interesting the restaurants and worse are really nice some of the restaurants are more focusing on the westernized face but yeah so i personally prefer the ones with authentic taste similar so and there are a couple of restaurants we can recommend it taste the same like they would back in south australia because most of the koreans finer and worse like these are owned by koreans so don't really have any complaints korean beauty standard is really really formalized we all know like this is considered beautiful probably younger people are really chasing the standardized beauty how you look good is considered one of the top values in korea which is not really good not really nice but i think it's true and then korean plastic surgery techniques are also the word best yeah i think the korean beauty standard is very standardized you know there's a certain right set of beauty that's gotta fit into the box really strange i think everybody has this charm right um everybody looks different they have their charm but you know i think in korean society a lot of people just want to change their eye into a more standard good-looking eyes i don't think it's very positive thing but in europe i think it's rather more of the personal charm you know western countries including poland i can recognize they have standardized beauty of course compared to the level of standardized it's totally different korea including other asian countries it's like a really firm but in eu or other american countries they also have like their preferences but outside of those standards is also highly acceptable i think it's not about polish people it's more like people in warsaw the cold distant uh hard to really approach yeah that was my stereotype true depends on individual most of the time so you say about warsaw did you experience something different in other cities oh yeah definitely yeah i really love myself postnan frostflow people are very friendly and nice i think i was quite shocked because i lived most of the time in warsaw so i just thought all the poor people were just you know cold and distant and went to the other city they were very hospitable i was really shocked and you know it was really probably the further cities from warsaw they have lack of experiences to meet foreigners they are just really welcoming us they don't hesitate to help us out whenever we ask for direction or something i really feel differences from people outside of warsaw about their hospitality there's not much to do not many events like you go out and buy things are pretty much the same you know um when i realized after one year in poland the smart way that i can enjoy life in poland learning how to enjoy nature most new polls are very sporty they really know how to enjoy a nature go on hiking kayaking in the summer i was born and raised in a city which is really crowded we always always rely on those kind of some entertainment places and some restaurants or fun places to go and pay and have fun there it was kind of challenging especially in the winter i literally don't know how to kill my time i'll say i have a very positive opinion about studying in porn uh the faculty my university they're very professional and nice uh very knowledgeable as well and most of the professors were very helpful when it comes to uh let's say i don't understand a topic they're more than happy to like answer you taking like 20-30 minutes of their time through email in person they're very happy to teach you know and also uh most of them speaks very proficient english that was great that's really nice part of korean university and faculties have to learn from because we are still stick to very very full like hierarchy structure between professor and student even though we paid um kind of high for tuition fee we are really hesitant sometimes we are scared of reaching them out to ask some questions it's never going to be a casual relationship you know most of like asian countries in general they have longer working hours for example starting with nine hours we have less day off also the hierarchy not only from school but also most of the organization hierarchy is a big part that many employees are stressed out work and life balance wise it's literally incomparable one thing i was in culture shock is even my polish pose encouraged me other like teammates to just sign off the computer and then have fun or have time with your family but you know in korea no the longer hour you were you are considered a prestigious employee do you have more chances to promote i would never regret about my decision to come and work in poland because of my work and life balance it's really amazing um it's a shame that i didn't like really learn and understand about the language i mean the cultural part like organically absorbed without much effort as far as we like settle down here but yeah the language part i heard so many stereotypes about the difficulty level of polish so i was kind of scared to even begin but yeah it's always in my mind that i have to do and then like a high tone and the pronunciation itself is really really really hard something that happened that when i was in good dance uh i was in a bar playing some billiard minding my business some guy just came up to me like hit my uh stick and i went up to him like ask him like what's that for maybe i should say sorry and he just got super angry all this friend like gathered around me and i started like shouting slurring and you know i think it's one point i think i heard like go back to your country and also like a police came and they literally didn't do anything so i playing quite disturbing the fact that they don't really care but you know as a person that never been in such country but different culture differences i thought maybe they would give me some of the assistance you know because it's not my country and like i was the victim like i had like complete opposite experience back in turkey like every time i go there people are very friendly they're very helpful so like you know i really uh was really easy for me to like get adjusted to their culture and learn about the coach but since you guys don't really have that i think a lot of international people living in poland doesn't really feel necessary to learn homes for their you know your culture a lot of poor people they ask my friends and me like if you speak any posts yeah they usually say no most of my international friends they don't speak the word of polish because they never got a chance to like make uh close friends or you know like learn about the culture because we're very distant kind of cool so yeah i just always uh the simple kindness is not very hard the more of that i think it'll be better for both partners sorry to hear you've had like openstack uh bad things happen everywhere i think i had that experience in turkey australia america so it's normal but uh yeah this is what i thought about here we'd like to end the interview please remember that those were perspectives of only two people living in poland experiences and impressions will differ from person to person however we find it very interesting to learn about a different point of view how about you please let us know in the comments down below and also remember to say a big thank you to our guests for sharing their time and experiences hopefully see you soon in the dixon|||H PRESIDENT, DUDA, HERE IN WARSAW. THEY'RE GOING TO TALK ABOUT  SUPPORT FOR UKRAINE, BOLSTERING  NATO OBVIOUSLY. POLAND HAS GREATLY FELT THE  IMPACT OF RUSSIA'S INVASION. THEIR DEFENSE FORCES HAVE GROWN  IN NUMBERS AS WELL SINCE RUSSIA  STARTED INVADING ITS NEIGHBOR,  AND WHEN WE GOT HERE IN WARSAW,  WE SPOKE WITH SOME OF THE NEWEST POLISH RECRUITS ABOUT WHY  THEY'RE SIGNING UP FOR POLAND'S  VERSION OF THE NATIONAL GUARD. SOME OF THEM HAVE NEVER HELD A  GUN IN THEIR LIFE. THEY ARE TEACHERS, FARMERS,  BANKERS, AND EVEN AN ASPIRING  OPERA SINGER, NOW VOLUNTEERING  FOR BASIC TRAINING IN WARSAW. THEY ARE DAYS AWAY FROM  GRADUATING AND BECOMING INFANTRY PERSONNEL, THE POLISH VERSION OF THE U.S. NATIONAL GUARD. WHEN RUSSIA INVADED UKRAINE, AND PLACED WAR ON POLAND'S DOORSTEP, THEY SAW RISE IN RECRUITS. NOW THE DEFENSE MINISTER EXPECTS RECRUITS TO REACH 50,000 IN THE  COMING YEARS. >> AWARENESS IS THE FIRST STEP  OF THIS. >> Reporter: FOR POLAND, THE  COUNTRY WITH THE LOWEST GUN  OWNERSHIP PER CAPITA IN EUROPE,  THE INVASION BECAME A NATIONAL  CALL TO ARMS FOR PEOPLE WITH DAY JOBS. >> WE SLOWLY TURNED CIVILIANS  INTO SOLDIERS. WE TEACH THEM THE STRUCTURES. WE TEACH THEM HOW TO WEAR THE  UNIFORM. WE TEACH THEM HOW TO BEHAVE. WE TEACH THEM WHEN TO SALUTE,  WHEN TO NOT SALUTE. >> Reporter: MARY, A 36-YEAR-OLD MOTHER OF TWO, NOW FINDS HERSELF BALANCING LIFE AS A BANKER ON  THE BATTLEFIELD. >> I'M VERY HAPPY THAT I HAVE  THIS POSSIBILITY TO WORK AND TO  BE A SOLDIER. >> Reporter: 22-YEAR-OLD LAURA  IS AN ASPIRING OPERA SINGER WHO  JOINED THE TDF IN SOLIDARITY  AFTER BEING SHOCKED BY RUSSIA'S  BRUTAL INVASION.  >> YOUNG PEOPLE, WE ARE SHOCKED  ABOUT THE SITUATION, AND WE WANT TO HELP THE UKRAINE. >> Reporter: AND HAVE YOU EVER  HANDLED A GUN BEFORE? >> NO. NO. WHEN I CAME HERE, IT WAS MY  FIRST -- FIRST CONNECT WITH  EVERYTHING MILITARY. >> Reporter: DID IT SURPRISE  YOU? >> A LITTLE BIT, YES, BECAUSE  IT'S HEAVY.  >> VERY HEAVY.  >> Reporter: LAURA'S TWIN SISTER JOINED THE TDF BEFORE HER, AND  THEIR MOM HAS ALSO JUST APPLIED. >> YOUR MOM IS JOINING TDF? >> YEAH. >> AND YOU'RE IN FDF AND YOUR  SISTER? >> Reporter: LAURA, MARY, AND  THE REST OF THE RECRUITS UNDERGO 16 DAYS OF BASIC TRAINING,  GRADUATING, AND THEN REPORTING  ONCE A MONTH. >> IN TDF, YOU HAVE TO LEARN HOW TO CRAWL BEFORE YOU WALK. >> Reporter: PUTIN'S UNPROVOKED  WAR IN UKRAINE PROMPTING CIVIL  READINESS NOT SEEN IN EUROPE IN  DECADES.  >> YOU'RE SEEING THEM TURN INTO  AMAZING SOLDIERS.  >> Reporter: DESPITE THEIR  DIFFERENCES.  >>> ONE THING UNITES THE  TERRITORIAL AREA. >> EVERYONE YOU SEE BEHIND YOU  LOVES THEIR COUNTRY, AND  REGARDLESS OF THEIR SOCIAL  ECONOMIC STATUS, EDUCATION  LEVEL, EMPLOYMENT, THEY ALL LOVE POLAND, AND THEY ALL WANT TO  SERVE WITH A FLAG ON THEIR  SHOULDER. PATRIOTISM IS THE COMMON  DENOMINATOR. >> PATRIOTISM IS THE COMMON  DENOMINATOR. >> Reporter: IT WAS JUST AMAZING TO SPEND SEVERAL HOURS WITH  THEM. >> THAT WAS A GREAT PIECE. LIKE, REALLY, REALLY GREAT.  >> Reporter: IT WAS GREAT. I THINK IT'S SOMETHING WE NEVER  EXPECTED TO SEE, AND ALL OF  THESE PEOPLE GIVING SO MUCH FOR  THE CAUSE FROM ALL WALKS OF  LIFE, IT WAS FASCINATING. >> ALL RIGHT. >> Reporter: YOU GUYS KNOW WHEN  A STORY LIKE THIS, IT TAKES A  TEAM EFFORT. BETTY AND CLAY AND ANTONIO, WE  WERE ALL OUT THERE SETTING THIS  UP. IT WAS AMAZING TO SEE THESE  EVERYDAY, REGULAR PEOPLE WHO NOW HAVE NEVER HELD A GUN IN THEIR  LIVES AND THEY'RE SIGNING UP TO  DEFEND THEIR COUNT|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||hi guys hi i'm just making this video 
this document i'm not feeling well i hate them all by myself i hate that on 20th of january 
2022 i started feeling unwell   at first it was just the cold then the soul 
treats and then these headaches that won't stop   the next thing i found myself in an ambulance 
and here was in the hospital funny right   i probably already read heard about the symptoms 
of kovid i've been sick many times but how i   felt on this day was nothing compared to 
all the previous sicknesses i've ever had   now it feels like you have malaria but 
a little bit worse than malaria well   i thought i i thought you're vaccinated…? you 
can get yes you can yes you can remember we've   got the delta variant the omicron and all the 
other ones that we don't even know the names yet   so yes i got covered i live alone so at first 
i was trying to tough it out i had gone to take   care of a friend was ill and it turned out she 
had covered and at the time we both didn't know   and that was how i got covered just in case 
you're wondering how i contacted this disease   by the second day after the exposure all 
my symptoms heightened and the next thing   i remember was being taken in an ambulance 
isolation my results came in the same night   and it was positive now the best and worst 
place to find out your Covid 19 positive   is in the hospital it's best because you 
would definitely be hospitalized as you have   nurses and doctors who can take care of you worse 
because you're trapped your isolation will be   in the coveted world which brings me to the 
psychological effects of isolating in a hospital   this entire floor is designated for coveted 
isolation now on this floor there are different   rooms with different patients battling the 
different faces of this virus you can hear them   struggling to breathe you can hear them 
crying you can hear people in pain you can   see some of them strapped to oxygen masks 
because they can no longer breathe on their own   i was rolled into this room and we had two other 
ladies an elderly woman and a middle-aged woman   on my first night here i was too sick to be 
bothered about talking to other people and   getting to know what was going on i was so sick 
to even be bothered about being bored but by the   next couple of days i realized i was in for a 
ride the only human contact i got was either   with nurses doctors or cleaners and they came in 
completely covered up in covid protection suits   the other contact we got with directly unprotected 
contacts with other patients so so far as you had   copied you didn't need to wear masks in this 
room and we could interact with each other   now with daily iv drips of antibiotics blood 
thinner injections on my stomach vitamins   pills temperature on pulse checks three to 
four times a day and occasionally the nurses   would come around and try to gist with us that 
was the only thing all we could do was look and   see how life was going on outside through 
the windows we weren't even allowed to open   the windows completely only to get air and only 
the top compartment of the window would be open   i stood here and i looked outside and i could 
see my building from here so so sad that i was   so close to home yet i couldn't go home i felt 
trapped this hospital was killing me as every day   passed ego was my mental health was depreciating 
let's talk about the food the hospital food where   do i begin tasteless bland repetitive these 
are some adjectives to describe this food by day three i couldn't take it 
anymore i would cry for no reason   i felt trapped everything was just wrong my 
parents were so worried but i kept on acting   like always well with me meanwhile i was 
sinking emotionally i felt caged my veins   were starting to collapse from consistent 
iv drips and injections i noticed my hands   started to swell and i was in so much pain so 
i called the nurses for help to take out the iv yeah my first four nights were horrible when it 
came to my symptoms everything was wrong sometimes   i would feel better and then other times i would 
have this burning up fever sometimes i would be   able to breathe other times i'm coughing and i'm 
sore and i'm struggling to breathe everything was   just going south i also noticed a similar trend 
with other patients because most nights a lot of   people would be feverish and the nurses would have 
to come to attend to all of us one after the other   on one of these nights the older lady in 
the room had spent the whole day crying   i sat on my bed and i didn't know how to help her   i rolled over and got to hers she didn't speak any 
english so i tried to ask her what was wrong with   her communication was a big problem so i decided 
to pull out google translate on my phone and we   began conversing that was when she told me that 
she had been in isolation for 19 days and she was   losing it mentally she told me she couldn't take 
it anymore and she couldn't she would rather die   i pushed back the tears in my eyes and gave her 
a big hug i remember staying in the hog for such   a long time i knew she needed the hog so did i i 
thought that everything was going to be all right   don't worry about this i had this 
because my vein collapsed as well   and it was hurting me so they had to wrap me 
here it still was a big but it's okay i have okay some days i would decide to take a walk just 
around the world because that's the only place   we were allowed to even the end 
of it was love to be key okay   i'll just take a walk around the hallway sit 
down i dreaded walking past this hallway because   every time i came out and walked through this 
hallway i would tend to know what is going on   in other rooms and it always made me feel sad so 
most of the times i would rather stay in my room   now if your friends brought some stuff for me like 
change of clothes and food to the hospital because   i had coffee that i couldn't have any visitors 
right now they would have to label those items   and tag them covered and drop them at the 
hospital gate now for us in the coffee words we   get our deliverables once a day and we get 
it at 8pm so if a family member or a friend   brought food for you it will sit at the gates 
until 8 pm i wish i could explain it all to you   the gloom the sadness the pain the stories that 
comes with being in isolation in the hospital   there's a cloud of depression hovering around 
there the doctors made it clear that i was   going to be here for 11 days so by day 6 i 
got up i decided to find the silver lining i started to feel better physically mentally i was 
still in a pit but i decided to make a decision   i took out my camera and started to film 
some of these videos that you have seen today   i kept on waiting to hear the magic 
words “dzisiaj idziesz do domu”   today you would go home a few days passed and both 
my roommates got discharged and i was left alone   i'd like to thank God for netflix on mobile   at least i watched a couple of series that 
kept me busy while i was losing my mind hey guys i'm so excited the other things 
i'm excited about is let me show you my friend sends me a whole jar of sweet 
things are you ready so wait and see okay who knew who knew that   these are the things that would make me happy 
i also forgot to tell you guys i got crocs look at how the little things and what 
are making me happy i got crooks so now   i have shoes that i can wear around instead of 
just my socks and i got new change of clothes too   peace let me go and eat my food guys today i'm going it was nice knowing here so 
it's time to take this paper off and rip it rip it rip it rip it bye so and now guys i'm going to the zero 
floor this is the first time i've   entered this elevator since after i 
was brought up here i'm so excited good i'm outside i'm outside i'm outside i'm outside i'm 
outside i'm outside i am outside i am outside i'm outside i'm outside i'm outside this is what our side looks and 
feels like the breeze everything everything oh my goodness i'm so emotional right now to 
think it started off from here thank you Jesus so guys now i'm back home now i feel better i've been sleeping a lot because that's one 
thing that you get to do when you have coffee   because most of the time you're asleep like 
when i was in the hospital last when i was   in the hospital the last couple of days i was 
mostly sleeping during the day and at night i   would just be awake so i've still not been able 
to get out of that um we are functioning and   my friends are scared of me i think only one 
person has actually physically met me since   i've been out of the hospital and the others 
are like no i'm not i'm not messing up with you   so yeah i am i'm okay i guess still feel feverish 
from time to time so one thing about covid was   that sometimes you feel okay so it's like a very 
like this like a sine wave kind of illness i   don't know how to explain it but sometimes it 
feels like you're very fine you're in perfect   conditions and then the next minute you're 
feeling feverish you're having headaches and   the next minute you're feeling so tired the next 
minute you're coughing like yesterday night i   noticed i was coughing again but yeah i was given 
uh this thing to spray my throat so i occasionally   have to spray it so i really don't know what it 
so i'm just going to experience what it is like   after you have recovered from kovid um hopefully 
i'll get back to work uh in a couple of days   and yeah so guys uh thank you so much for watching 
this video um thank you so much for reaching out   and it means a lot to me so do not forget to 
subscribe do not forget to like do not forget to   comment and i'll see you guys when i'm fully back 
i hope that the next video i upload on my channel   is a happy lively business as usual kind of 
video so see you guys in the next one bye i feel stuck here in the middle|||what's up you guys and welcome back to the 
channel we have been told by several polish people   not to come to katowice so if you have been 
following us for long enough you know exactly   what we did we came to katowice to see what the 
city has to offer so let's go and explore the city   so right now i'm sitting directly in front of 
spodek which in polish it translates to spaceship   and it's an incredibly interesting looking 
design for an arena there's also a bunch   of other things inside the spodek they hold 
play they hold concerts they have three huge   car parks in there there's apparently a very 
large gym in there as well it seems to have   quite a little bit of construction going on 
around the outside of it but nonetheless this   is a very beautiful and very unique building now 
typically when people think of visiting poland   especially from a tourist perspective you think 
of places like Gdansk warsaw krakow or maybe even   zakopane if you're planning on doing a ski trip 
or some hiking or something like that but katowice   never really makes that list and today we are 
basically going to be asking the question why   why is that why has katowice not made 
the list of typical polish tourist city   destinations and that's exactly why we came here 
to katowice basically to explore we're going to   be spending a couple of days wandering around 
and seeing what is really going on in this city this area that we are in at the moment is 
very interesting because it's kind of a mix of   different things so you have these like very very 
modern looking buildings where big consultancy   and agencies are in um kind of lined with the 
spodek that arena and that luke has been talking   about in the distance you see a mining tower over 
there and then you also see quite a bit of like   flats that like large apartment buildings that 
look like they were maybe built in like the   i'd say the 70s or the 80s so it seems to 
be like a very diverse type of architecture   but it all comes together and it seems to be very 
nice the city of katowice was actually seized from   the nazis in 1945 by the soviet army and it 
was re-declared as being poland and actually   since 2020 katowice is categorized as a gamma 
metropolis of globalization and development   and it seems to be working in the right direction 
to give itself the name as a modern day metropolis   wow you guys look at the size of these apartments 
here this one apartment building and i would   really like to know how many people fit into this 
um i'd say there's easily like 300 400 apartments   in there and in each one of them probably several 
people so you can calculate yourself how many   people might live in there just here behind me 
you can see the contrast of the much much older   buildings and architecture in comparison to 
this building over here you have ultra modern   buildings almost like skyscraper modern day 
european architecture mixed in with old 40s 50s   60s style almost soviet style architecture and 
it just adds a certain type of unique character   to katowice katowice has quickly become known as 
the leading cultural city in all of the Silesia  Voivodeship and it is known for festivals music 
concerts and a bunch of other incredible events   such as the national radio orchestra is actually 
located here in katowice as well and right now   we are on one of the main walking streets and 
shopping areas in the center of katowice and   you can see that this place is truly thriving 
there's plenty of people out and about living   their lives doing their shopping and there's loads 
of amazing local markets to check out as well my god you guys this is so cool 
check this out it seems like there is   a public piano that people or like 
locals that just walk by can play   on and there's actually a lot of people 
stopping and clapping and all of that so   i think that's a really really great idea 
and this grandma here is actually really good   right now we're in galleria katowicka which is one 
of the many amazing super malls that you will find   scattered all over katowice again adding an 
amazing extra dimension to the city of katowice   this mall itself is really amazing not only 
because of the choice of shops obviously you have   everything here from a to z that you would find 
in any other larger european city really and this   mall is also really interesting because of its 
architecture i kind of feel like it's just hyper   modern and everything kind of is white and cement 
like this very hyper modern industrial type of   a mall which i think makes it look really 
interesting check this house here out   where the zhafka is in them it 
literally looks like a squirrel stream   and if i was a squirrel i would rent the space 
in there for sure right now we are in the main   market square of katowice and beautiful modern 
and contemporary buildings surround this beautiful   plaza it's also crisscrossed with tram lines 
and you can commonly see trams just passing by   on every side of this plaza square it is a super 
nice laid-back atmosphere here in this plaza   there's plenty of coffee shops uh outdoor cafes 
there's beautiful stairs just over here behind me   where you can see people just chilling and having 
their midday lunch and we are lucky once again to   have beautiful sunshine here with us today as we 
are filming around this amazing city Gesundheit, Danke   it's quite strange actually the weather 
and the temperature difference between here   and zakopane we came here on the bus from 
zakopane and it took us yesterday around   three and a half hours nearly four hours to get 
here to Katowice obviously there's quite a big   difference in elevation between the two places 
so you really do feel the temperature difference   today is a sunny day and we were expecting 
to be a little bit on the chilly side but   wow it's hot yeah this morning when we were 
in our accommodation i was telling luke to   put on something warm because he kind of 
had short sleeve short sleeves and then   now we are really regretting the decision because 
it's actually so hot that uh i think like a nice   summery dress or maybe just a t-shirt would have 
been enough yeah i definitely am considering it i   should have brought a hat with me as well i'm 
gonna have a red head for the next few videos   obviously there are loads of other things that 
katowice has to offer there's not only malls and   nice architecture around here there are loads and 
loads of music festivals concerts going on loads   of museums and art galleries and all of that good 
stuff so i do think katowice is a valid choice if   you're looking for somewhere to get away maybe for 
a weekend do like a nice city trip and get to know   poland and the silesia area a little bit better 
now in terms of things that we have on our to-do   list while we're here in katowice there's quite a 
few there is the silesian museum which is supposed   to be an absolutely beautiful interactive museum 
that teaches you all about the history of silesia   of course there's also an area that's called  Nikiszowiec if i'm pronouncing that correctly   and it is supposed to be a coal miner settlement 
area of katowice that is a must see while you   are here now this is the interesting part 
we're going to be in katowice for a few days   and we're definitely going to be filming another 
video while we're here so hit that red subscribe   button if you haven't already because we're 
definitely going to be going and checking out   Nikiszowiec so if you want to see that video 
click away now today is just our very first day   of wandering around and checking out the sites 
here in katowice so we are very much totally new   to this city and we're seeing it with fresh eyes 
so guys this is a question for you drop it down   in the comments if you can what are the must do 
things while we are in katowice and you never know   we may go and pick one of those comments and 
feature that in the next video here because we are   anxiously looking for incredible places to see 
that are a little bit off of the beaten path and   that's why we came to katowice in the first place 
because yes it's nice to go to places such as   krakow or like zakopane for example but so many 
millions of tourists have been to these places   so we are currently on the hunt for the real side 
of poland we want to experience what the locals   experience so let us know down below so we've been 
here now for a few hours wandering around these   beautiful and unique streets check this 
building out beside me it's really interesting   all of the architecture here actually is super 
interesting that's like we said it's just a   total blend of so many different eras and ages all 
combined into this former coal mining settlement   of a city so it really just adds a whole different 
perspective to a modern day european west european   city what's your first impressions of katowice so 
my first impression i think i am very positively   surprised because as i said in the very beginning 
of this video people were actually telling us   not to go to katowice because some people said 
it was maybe boring or not that much to do really   and i do think it's quite the opposite i 
think there's loads and loads of things to   explore here in the area and maybe try out 
some new restaurants and cafes so i do think   as i said before it is a valid option if 
you are looking for like a weekend getaway   uh like a cultural destination um for like maybe 
three or four days i'd say yeah definitely and   uh something that jumps out at me um particularly 
is the amount of greenery that is around this city   a lot of people described katowice to us as being 
somewhat of a boring gray dull type of environment   and the city itself is actually far from that it's 
actually plenty of parks open nature-esque areas   and a lot of people seem to just be enjoying 
life here it's not as dull and gray as it was   previously described to us as being and 
it's definitely surprised me and naomi   just walking around briefly as we have done 
today this is probably going to be a relatively   quick first impression video but we are very 
positively surprised about katowice and can't wait   to spend more time here too both thumbs up yeah 
absolutely so that being said guys that's it from   us today you guys my name is naomi my name is luke 
we are the two med explorers we'll see you guys   in the next video thanks for watching bye-bye 
by the way it's your reminder to keep exploring   everything that we do is because of you guys 
thank you so much for watching this video this   is a quick reminder that we have started 
our channel memberships and you can join   super quick and easy just go and click that 
join button in our little channel banner   slash whatever you call it and join up see 
those perks and become a channel member today   super cheap it's cheaper than a cup 
of coffee at your local trendy hipster   cafe situation so go check out 
those perks and support the channel|||Gonna take my body down Right down, down, down to the river Gonna take my body down Let the water, carry me away Just float away Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh Bury all of my things Bury me in my skin All that I've done Oh lord, I'm done Who'd wanna be king Pulling too many strings? All that I've done Oh lord, I'm done Ohh, ohh Carry me away I float away Ohh, ohh Ohh In the river Gonna lay my head right down Right now, now, now and forever Gonna lay my head right down Let the water carry me away Just float away Bury all of my things Bury me in my skin All that I've done Oh lord, I'm done Who'd wanna be king Pulling too many strings? All that I've done Oh lord, I'm done Ohh, ohh Carry me away I float away Ohh, ohh Ohh In the river Ohh In the river Ohh In the river Ohh Ohh Bury all of my things Bury me in my skin All that I've done Oh lord, I'm done Who'd wanna be king Pulling too many strings? All that I've done Oh lord, I'm done Ohh, ohh Gonna take my body down Right down, down,  down to the river|||I'm on my way to Poland. 
To the city of Gdańsk. These days, most people vacationing in Europe are avoiding Eastern Europe because of the
war in Ukraine. Poland borders Ukraine, Belarus, and the Russian enclave of Kaliningrad, meaning
it's right next door to war and crisis. That scares tourists. But is it justified? I want to check out a city that is usually overrun in summer by
visitors from Germany and Scandinavia. I've booked a city tour with Sebastian, and
I blurt out the harsh reality. Sebastian, if I take a look around, there
are not that many tourists. Is the tourism in Poland affected by the war in Ukraine?
Is that the reason? Yes you have to remember that we have the
war next to our borders, so it has to have an effect on tourism. Especially like the
bigger groups, from the States and other parts of the world. The individual tourists are
coming, they are here. But it's not the same what was before. First the pandemic, 
now we have the war. All of this things have an effect on our local tourism. What do the people say when they are canceling
the tours? Do they say, the war is too close, it might come over to Poland?
If they can choose, they will choose another If they can choose, they will choose 
another destination where there is no risk. That's one point. The second point is that they are afraid of the imagination, that there are
plenty of refugees in the streets. Because of the numbers. We have almost 4 million
people who came to Poland from Ukraine. Tourism authorities reiterate that traveling
in Poland is just as safe as in Western Europe. But there are still 60 percent fewer foreign
tourists and 90 percent fewer group trips. That's hard because every tourist is needed here. The port brought a lot of money into the city.
You can see that here in this street, Ulice Długi, or Long Lane. This is where wealthy
citizens lived. But look what it says up here: 1953. the Second World War. All these houses are new.
Reconstructed down to the last detail. Only this house here, the Uphagen house, is original. What to do with the ruins in the city? Some
ideas said it's better to leave it as an open air museum for the next generation, to show
them how the war was cruel. Another idea was to create the new city of Gdańsk for example
in Lebniza or New Port district. But finally, they decided 
to reconstruct the old main town. St. Mary's Church also miraculously survived
the bombing. It's the largest brick church in Europe. Well, that's a cool ferry! A pirate ship. It casts off several times a day and heads
to Westerplatte, a peninsula close to Gdańsk. My destination is in sight. Now I'm on Westerplatte, a place with a lot of history. Before World War I, Westerplatte was a seaside resort.
This is where the people of Gdańsk went in summer. A popular destination. But after the First World War, this was no
longer such a peaceful place. Poland built a military depot. And then, on September 1st, 1939, it happened.
The event that changed Europe, indeed the entire world. This is where the first shots of World War II 
were fired. Germany invaded Poland. This is the former guard house. It has deliberately
been preserved as a ruin. 182 Polish soldiers resisted the German invasion for 7 days. Here their names are immortalized. Westerplatte isn't just a historical place.
It's now also a memorial. For the people of Poland, Westerplatte is
a symbol of resistance against Nazi Germany. And this monument here was erected in honor
of the heroes of Westerplatte. WAR NEVER AGAIN it says here. And yet, in
the middle of Europe, there's been war since Russia attacked Ukraine. I think it's really sad. People are losing 
their families, their houses and are migrating to other countries. I hope it
stops soon. But I think, the neighboring countries also feel threatened, because we never now
what is going to happen. We all hope that it's going to stop soon. I look at these photos and I know that a few
hundred kilometers away, war is a reality. I hope we will find the strength to learn
from the past. This place makes me a bit sad. And at
the same time thoughtful. Westerplatte not only reminds us of a terrible war, but also
serves as a warning to keep peace in Europe.|||[Music] the region of upper silesia feels like a world in and of itself the locals have a unique perspective on history are fighting to declare their vernacular as an official language which indeed is not comprehensible to that of polish and many openly declare they have been defined by the industry of coal mining so today i'm visiting the industrial city of zabja which was first mentioned as far back as the 13th century the city claimed its significance upon noticing shallow veins of coal which were just a small fraction of what was later to be found and considering that what exists at street level here was so greatly defined by what's below i headed to one of the most notorious mines so that i could be at the heart of the region 320 meters inside the earth [Music] when it comes to pullins poland's tourist attractions most people around the world would recognize a handful one of such being the salt mine in vielichka and as that experience is incredible it completely romanticizes the notion of mining when there's a complete flip side to the equation coal mining in more modern times is extremely relevant within the country and although there are less tourist routes available within that vein here in zabja is one of the most incredible underground tours you can take in the country to experience the history of coal mining in silesia the grandness of this antiquated elevator technology is sincerely belittling this heavy duty dangerous equipment could have horrific consequences if ever misused this shaft is 320 meters deep this elevator system is antiquated in some regards but it's perfectly functional and they really uphold the tradition of mining as you'll see the gauge beside me tells the shift operator where the various cages are within the shaft now i asked what would happen if he pushed the lever down a little bit too hard would a cage just pop out of the top you know would it be dangerous apparently following a very tragic accident in the 1960s several automated safety mechanisms are in place to ensure the safety of all who would like to visit the depths of the mine [Music] this bell system is rather elaborate when it comes to the communication between people inside the shaft and the elevator operator not only do they inform which level the elevator needs to descend or ascend but which cages are occupied with human beings therefore the elevator would go to a given level and then unload various levels of the cage now there's one other thing i just observed here as the operator of this level has ascended when he left gave a signal loaded rather promptly into the elevator closing the door and then the elevator gradually went down went up as if the operator was giving a signal to the workers that you guys better be in here you better be safe because i'm about to move this thing the reason being if that mine employee were alone down here loading in there's no one else to give a signal to tell the operator that he is safely aboard so there's kind of a safety mechanism that you really need to be observant of because if you were halfway in the elevator and halfway out when it moved the consequences would be fatal finally it was time to descend into the belly of the mine where my guide would bring me up to speed on the attraction and the local culture guido coal mine in sabja is a very special place in a very special place because inside we can find a huge amount of attractions especially we are touristical objects in former real mind we are 320 even more than 320 meters below the surface in the place where till 1995 miners were normally working we have huge machines we have equipment which is present on the normal mind what's more we can touch it we can see it and we can watch those machines when they are working and we offer you more than 10 kilometers touristical roads under the zabja city in the heart of the silesia [Music] so in good mind you can sight see three levels 170 meters below the surface with the musial historical aspects of mining with the chapel of saint barbara level 320 with the more than three and a half kilometers of touristical way with a lot of machines with a lot of exponents with pure mine and the level 355 about three kilometers of walking in total darkness in very authentical spaces of the mind this mine was established in 1855 with maximum production peaking in 1885 when 312 976 tons of coal was cut decline became noticeable in the 1930s and the mine closed in 1960 by 1967 it was reopened as a test mine for experimental machines now a museum on display you can see a well-preserved horse stable where animals once regarded as luxury items were cared for by dedicated handlers they were said to be so intuitive to their work that they actually internalized the duration of their shift there's also a modern chapel here built in the honor of saint barbara who is an important figure to the minors as a patron of a happy death and everything that is dangerous at over 300 meters below ground there is a monorail with about a half kilometer of rail now this is actually a very typical use of communication and transport in minds as the rails flexible can be set up on demand but today i'm going to enjoy it as a tourist one of the big differences here is that uh unlike an amusement park ride you are in real underground elements most of the tourist corridors are watered so there's not dust but when you get a little bit deeper into the cavernous areas of this mine dust starts to flake out everywhere which is a tremendous feeling makes you feel almost as if we're true miner [Music] my next stop was the krulova luisa complex which is very much at the center of zabra's beginnings for many years there was a local legend of the existence of a multi-kilometer long tunnel and forgotten shafts under the city but it wasn't until municipal workers accidentally stumbled upon an overlooked manhole cover that the rediscovery of the complex occurred locals had been searching for this site for years they sought out theoretical access points in basements they surveyed the surface and just by chance it was found fortunately authorities generously invested millions into securing parts of the complex so that now tourists can visit the edit was created in the course of the 8th and 19th century to the water the place and allow miners going deeper with the exploitation of coal apart from that it was also used as a transport route for coal which was transported in boats directly from the underground and transported then to gliwitza to the ironworks where it was used [Music] this one kilometer boat ride underground is just astonishing this is exactly the type of attraction that you imagine in your wildest dreams as a child the fact that it actually exists and it's accessible it says a lot about the people of zabra who went to a great length to make this a reasonably safe possibility i am mesmerized by the droplets of water by the coolness of the passing stone and if ever you should be passing through this region of poland it's an absolute obligatory stop on your visit [Music] in the times when these waterways were used to transfer coal battery-powered engines were not a possibility as we just enjoyed on the contrary miners had to physically power the boats by hand you can see relics of the handles used to propel the goods forward amazingly this canal stretched through glavitza and ultimately connected to the older river which reaches cities such as vroltswolf and ultimately the baltic sea you could say in a sense that zabja was a port city so here we have an example of what a fully loaded transport boat would look like miners would stand atop these boats holding the handles that i showed you earlier and they'd actually propel the load with the use of their feet now when fully loaded this would weigh somewhere around the neighborhood of eight tons so it was a very slow and methodical process to say the least what my tourist exp appearance here are 200 of years of history of mining because we are here visiting one of the oldest the coal mines in region also one of the biggest in the history and greatest in the history which was working for over 207 years but according to some people which is still working because some parts of it are still operating and are still in use [Music] as i ascended from the depths of the historic tour i exited an elevator only to immediately take a staircase down to a comparably modest depth of about 5 meters this is where you can enjoy the underground family route to the untrained eye this educational technical park looks and feels exactly like an authentic mind and yet it is little more than a simulation created so that technical students could become masters of this dangerous profession but in relative safety in many minds around the world narrow gauge railway is an optimal way to transport the laborers around however it has one fault it does not deal well with steep inclines and for that reason in the more modern construction of mines monorails have definitely won but these trains are still a very important asset to the mining industry and therefore we're going to take a nice little ride [Music] when i finally headed back above ground it was already evening and the weather had shifted to a freezing negative 15 degrees celsius the snow was falling having covered so much space for so many hours in a maze of complete isolation even the quiet town of zabzi seemed intense in saying my farewells to the day i noticed that adjacent the mine shaft was a collection of military tanks turning out to be the military technical foundation an impressive exhibit including tracked vehicles armed personnel carriers military trucks rocket launchers and even the t-34 and t-72 tanks used by the polish army in the 20th century despite the painfully cold temperatures they actually offered to take me for a spin zabja is the only place on earth i can think of where one can descend deep underground take a boat ride under the city center pop up and go for a tank ride and for that reason i believe it warrants your visit in the nearest future so until then i am ryan silkesh for poland in [Music] you|||Hi,
Whatever i do is non of your concern I only spend the money i earn
I hang out with my own friends You ain't got nothing on your own but a wannabe
hi fi All you flex about is your Dad's money
But you still full of Jealousy (And so) Here or There  or There or here Imma go wherever i like to Black or white or White or Black bottle
Imma drink whichever i like to Right or left or Totter or stagger Imma walk whichever way i like to This and that and That and this
Whichever, imma do whatever i like to Our forefather's were once head hunter warriors
But our generation is full of keyboard warriors Boys and Girls, busy pointing fingers
Colony aunties are all about gossiping rumours Married and rich uncles,
please excuse those young girls Don't lay hands and snitch away all our chances
too If only the weathiest grab all the oppurtunities
What are we suppose to do? Its embarrasing,
No want dares to voice out when they are suppose to  
No want cares to stop, when they are suppose to  If you drink, there is fingers pointing from everywhere
If you dare to speak, then an Apology Letter That's our Nagaland
Corruption's dirty like it's nullah Make the money rain and watch everybody gather like the rain water during Floods  
Mentality too low like their Job opportunity (Why cause) Here or There or There or here Imma go wherever i like to Black or white or White or Black bottle
Imma drink whichever i like to Right or left or Totter or stagger Imma walk the whichever way i like to This or  that or That or this
Whichever, imma do whatever i like to Here or There or There or here Imma go wherever i like to Black or white or  White or Black bottle
Imma drink whichever i like to Right or left or Totter or stagger Imma walk the whichever way i like to This or that or That or this
Whichever, imma do whatever i like to I did all the struggle and hustle to get here
Got no time for mumble and rumble and all that trash talk  
Don't have to poke your nose everywhere you like to Its so annoying, when you sit home and type shits on internet You Illiterate 
Mindset so dirty Attitude, like a risktaker
But a real coward in reality You talk a lot, but you just a bragger
Are you even real? If so, show me where? As cold as winter was Nagaland's rap scene
I started all the dissings For 2 years, yeah i went missing
Now i am back for a mission I'm doing this for everybody
I paved a way for some artist already But our own people are our only critics
And Treats a foreign artists in our land like Gods! really?
(And that's why) Here or There or There or here
Imma go wherever i like to Black or white or White or Black bottle
Imma drink whichever i like to Right or left or Totter or stagger
Imma walk the whichever way i like to  
This or that or That or this
Whichever, imma do whatever i like to Here or There or There or here
Imma go wherever i like to  
Black or white or White or Black bottle
Imma drink whichever i like to Right or left or Totter or stagger
Imma walk the whichever way i like to  This or that or That or this
Whichever, imma do whatever i like to|||- I think we're drinking. - Oh are we? - Which is always a fun time. - Always a pleasure, yeah - You know, never ends in an argument. - Yeah, no, no, no. Wait a minute, hold on. Can we, can we put down
some matting over here? Like a crash pad? Would that be okay? (upbeat orchestral music) - From Poland! That is amazing and also
terrifying because their liquor, it's strong. - They go hard. The Polish go hard. - I feel like as our cultures we have a very similar attitude to drink. - But I also think like if
it was like spirits, Polish alcohol, it tend to be
substantially stronger than ours. - Yeah. - You know, what's weird. I actually, can't off the top of my head, think of any Polish spirit
brands, which is bad. - Mr. Muscle, oh no, that's a polish. That's a different. (Ciara laughs) It's different, sorry - You ever been to Poland? - I've never been to mainland Europe. - What? Wait. (Dermot laughs) What? - Nice can of Łomza. - Łomza. - Water, malts and hops. The good it's - That's everything you need in a beer. - What you want. - If this wasn't a beautiful looking beer as someone who doesn't
really like beer, to be fair considering it's from a can, It's got quite a sizeable head on it. That's exciting. - Could be cuz called them porter wrong. - Well, is that not, - I'm jokin. It looks good, Colin, I love you. It looks good - To me this looks good. - I'm not a Lager gal. - Are you not? - Not a lager gal. (Jamie and Callyann laugh) - [Grainne And Sean] (indistinct Polish) - Apologies, Paul, if we got that wrong. - We tried. - Oh my God, I need music playing. (Callyann snaps) We need to go to a festival, we need to be boppin. Oh my gosh, I'm so feeling this. - 5.6% and it tastes like that. - Actually yeah it's grown, thank God. That tastes very nice for
the amount of alcohol in it. - It tastes like beer. - I mean, it's fairly inoffensive. - I feel like Jamie and I,
we're getting, we're calling up the guys and the gals. We're meeting up outside the door. We're going to a festival. - Taxis on da way. (indistinct) is down for fuck's sake lads. Jesus, get it together here. - Started us off well, and we're happy. - Look at the smile on my face. That's not fake. It's real. This has done this to me. - That's a real hundred
percent genuine Grainne smile. (Grainne laughs) - At a push. This is the kind of thing like
you'd find me drinking beer if it was like at a house party, certain time in the morning
when there's no other alcohol and I'm drinking like this from like a Pringles can and
having like a great time. - I'm sorry. You're drinking that from a Pringles can? - Yeah. - So good. This is very good lager. And like I said, I'm not a
lager drinking person, but I if this was on offering at Irish
festivals, I'd go for this. - I get you. You are, your energy, just like, even if I don't
like this where I say, I didn't like this now, now I feel like I like it. Just cuz it's just hard to like, it's like yeah, you're actually right! (Jamie and Callyann laugh) - I didn't notice that. - Actually, I love it. Give me more! - See normally. (Grainne burps) - Oh Jesus, I'm sorry. - That was incredible. That's amazing. - Karpackie! - I do know Polish alcohol. - It's Karpackie. - It's 9%. - 9% Karpackie. Oh my god. - In big red letters. - Oh 9%. We're not killin ourselves. - Oh Karpackie. - [Cameraman] The first result was a beer review blog
that said Karpackie, which is rough pronunciation, Karpackie. - Karpackie, oh beautiful - Karpackie. - [Cameraman] Otherwise
pronounce it the way you werealready going to
cuz you're an ignorant English speaker whose idea of culture is drinking cheap beer. - Yeah. - I agree. - He nailed it. (Jamie laughs) - That person knew, I'm
so happy you read that. - He nailed it. How do you know my soul, what the hell? (Callyann laughs) What happened to ya? - Can you even beer? (Jamie and Callyann laugh) - I feel like I'm such a bad
measuring stick for this, I just look at you and I'm
like, what do you think? - I fuckin, I'm also a bad
measuring stick in that I'll put anything down me gullet, do you know what I mean? - That's doesn't taste
like 9% beer at all. Oh my God. - I think you're right. The other one was like sweeter. Member you were like - It had me pumped for a festival. This is the comedown. - There's a bit more
personality going on here. There's a bit more character to it. You know what I mean? But at the same time, this is just making me long to not focus on the drink and to just
mindlessly drink it and chat. - It's a little bit metallicy. - That's what it is. It's like a coin. - It tastes like the can. - See I'm more of a cider girl. - I love cider. - Yeah. Yeah. - So you know if this was cider, we laughing. - Oh yeah. Yeah. - Laughing 9% cider. - Oh that's dangerous though. - Dangerous. - I think sometimes a good mark of a drink is a drink that
allows itself to kind of be in the background and just let
you enjoy what you're doing. - Honestly. Yeah. - D'you get that feeling with this? is it just the background kinda feel? - It may just be because
it's in a pint glass and there are other people here. I'm not just drinking it
alone in my underpants. Do you know what I mean? Which I've been doing for the last year. So - You can be in your underpants. - I already am that's
she's only playing lads, I'm already in me underpants. There's nothing going, nothing else. but underpants going on under here. - From the waist down. - I'm wearin shoes, but
I'm not wearing pants. - Oh dear. Oh, it's vodka oh dear. - Now we're talkin. - This is what I was expecting. - Woo! That's so - Now this is fuckin Poland. - Legendary vodka that
combines Polish distillery tradition with technological advancements. - Wyborowa ideal for meetings. I wanna be in the fuckin meeting
room for business meetings. Like I love that energy. - That's fantastic. Well, that's lovely. - It's absolutely fab. - That is absolutely gorgeous. - Oh, that's quite smooth. - That's so smooth. - Where's the bang after? - That was perfectly fine. - Yeah it was great. - It's really smooth. - I'm not a huge vodka person but that's fantastic. - There's no - It's a common layer. Wait, hold on. - Where's the burn. - It is definitely
surprisingly easy, taste wise, it's very run of the
mill vodka, I think, but - It is sweet though, I think. - Yeah. There's a bit
of a sweetness to it. - Tunes of sweetness. - Oh, I really, really like that. - As somebody who doesn't
like vodka that much, what is it about it that you like? - I dunno. I honestly dunno. - You know the way
sometimes vodka can taste a little bit paint strippery? - Yes. - It doesn't have that. - It doesn't have that. - Yeah. - I wouldn't be a huge fan of that. - You know, like when you drink a shot of vodka and you go
(indistinct) like nothing, - I felt like I'd done
the facial expressions. - It was automatic. - We were both automatic. - It was like automatic,
and the I was like wait, there was no need for that. - That's cause your brain has
been trained to do that thing. - I think that may the
best vodka I've ever had. - Really? I think so. Sorry. I think I, - Well, that's a big statement. - Hold on. You need to react that way again. - Okay. - I think that may be the
best vodka I've ever had. - What?! (Dermot laughs) - You are the most naturalistic
actor I've ever seen in my life. - Oh no, is it vodka again? Oh, fuck me. - Ghost of the forest spirit. - Love that. - 95. I don't think I've ever
got 95 on a spelling test. - So I didn't even see what it's called. I just saw it's 95%. - Oh my God. - It's 95%. Holly balls, okay then. - Like, this is no fucking joke. Like this shit. This is no joke Cally. - Poland really like we started
off today with a 5.7% beer. We were like - We were like, "oh Jesus Christ!." That's - We went 5.7, 9, 9 40 95. - There's often a lot of old wives tales that if you had like a throat
infection or there was a lot of bacteria that this will,
you know, kill a lot of that. Obviously. I've tried it, it doesn't work. (Dermot laughs) - Gimme some motivational words of - Jamie, we've been on a journey. We've gone to Poland. We've we've embraced the culture. This is something we need to do. We want to be accepted
by the Polish and Poland. - Will they love us? - They will love us if
we are survive, this - The ghost of the forest spirit is going to take over our bodies. I'll turn into a deer. You'll turn into an
owl and it'll be great. - It's gonna be fun. We're gonna have a fun time. (Grainne coughs) (Jamie grimaces) - If the kick was missing
from the other one it's it's most definitely
not missing from this one. (Dermot coughs) - Wowwee (indistinct). My tone hurts. - Interesting. - Yeah, is it revealing anything
to you about your I dunno - About my life I'm kind of
having a epiphany, are you? - Same, yeah. - I need to go outta
here and do more things with my life than I thought I used to. - Fuck there's people
I need to apologize to. (Jamie laughs) - Have you ever had
Putchy you've had Putchy - I've had Putchy, yeah. That's without question. the hardest thing I've ever drank. - Really? - Oh, holy fuckin footballs. Okay, that was really fuckin oh Jesus. - I'm feeling hair just growing right now. Right here on my chest. It's just - Do ya know? - I don't think I've ever
had a shot like that. - That's strong. That's very strong. (Dermot slams table) - And nothing. Nothing from this one. - It's like a fume and you just have to - It's not like a fume I've
had, I've had ones of this of this fuckin level, this
percentage that literally evaporated, I didn't even taste anything. That's that was that fuckin lingered. - [Camerama] Do ya feel
the spirit of the forest? - I am inhabited by the
spirit of the forest now. Th ghost of the forest is in me. - I'm inhabited by a
burp that wants to come out that I don't trust. - For 95% for the strongest
alcohol that I've ever tried. - Well done Callyann and Jamie. because the fact that we're kind of like, we're mellow about it. Like I think we handled
that with dignity and grace. - Oh fuckin (Dermot slams shot glass on table) oh, that was (Dermot laughs) - Oh no, I'm definitely not sober. - I think you can notice
the energy change here. Like very quickly now
as this continues on. Like the alcohol's kind
of hitting right now so. We're just like getting philosophy. - Yeah, let's just do another one. Let's just have some DMC. - Yeah turn off the camera,
we'll have a few more Colin. - Are we done? - [Cameraman] Nope. - So guys now that you've had Eh, yeah sorry, we're done. - Is that it? - [Cameraman] But we still to
do the outro and the thing. - I can drink though, right? - [Cameraman] Sure. (Dermot laughs) - [Cameraman] So guys, now that you've had a selection of Polish alcohol, whathca think overall? - Fair play Poland. - All I can say is Poland. You definitely didn't come to play. Okay, Poland had a job to do. - You built up to that. - and they, they delivered. - Jamie, for the roulette. - Oh yeah. - That needs to be done
for a try, roulette. (Jamie laughs) That's a try roulette
drink if I was to ever. - I love how we're just
coming up with scheming. (Callyann laughs) - You know what, change
the whole channel, right? I think the try channel
should be a holiday channel and we got to Spain, a
pizza and Mexico, Cancun. (indistinct) I think we should go now. - Think of something,
anything that comes to mind, drinking song, go for it. (Ciara sings indistinctly) (Ciara bangs on table) (Ciara claps) - Like and subscribe.|||let's explore zakopane   my voice sounds ridiculous what's up guys welcome 
back to the channel and welcome to beautiful   zakopane we made our way here from Krakow we're 
happy to be here we're happy to explore around   so come along with us as we give you our first 
impressions of zakopane let's go zakopane is located   just at the foot of the tatra mountains and in the 
winter time it is known for being a skiing area so   like a ski resort type of area and for the summer 
time it's known for hiking if you want to come to   zakopane from krakow it's just a quick kind of two 
and a half hour bus drive away and for two people   we paid seven euro so it was super super cheap and 
definitely worth checking out so right now guys we   are on the main street or the main touristy street 
if you will called krupowki i hope again i'm not   butchering that pronunciation but we're basically 
going for a quick wander around this is our   first day properly exploring zakopane 
we're very excited to check this place out   this street in particular seems to have mostly 
restaurants cafes and a bunch of shops and stuff   like that so if you do want to do some sort of 
retail therapy or whatever this will be the place   for you to come we're also seeing a lot of people 
with the mountaineering sticks coming down from   hiking because we're obviously in the mountains 
here and we're surrounded by mountains so   that's a super interesting dynamic you have this 
beautiful shopping street and then you have hikers   and people that are kind of out camping and hiking 
around wandering through here as well so it's   super super nice and it gives you a nice warm cozy 
feeling i can see why this place is so popular   during the colder months this pedestrian zone here 
is just super cute and you literally just need to   look once and you know exactly where you 
are and that you are in the mountains   a lot of the shop fronts here they have all of the 
wood kind of and it's designed with a lot of love   and you can really tell like this is a mountain 
type of area so i suppose the whole idea of this   first video here in zakopane is just basically 
to show you guys exactly what we're seeing because   this is really our first day checking out this 
place and as naomi was saying definitely has that   sort of mountain-like charm to it we're definitely 
excited as well to sample some of the food here   i'm not too sure if the food is going to 
be so much different than it was in Krakow   but we're definitely excited to try something 
a little bit more on the cozy side when it   comes to food and we have a lot planned 
we have a lot of different stuff planned   throughout the week that we are here in 
zakopane there's so much things to do you have the   tatra national park you've got the lake morskie oko 
and you have a whole bunch of other things like   thermal springs as well to check out and some aqua 
parks as well so our list is growing by the second   ever since we got here our whole itinerary is just 
expanding and growing and we might even have to   book some extra time here a week might not be long 
enough for zakopane that's actually what i said   probably five minutes into being here we only 
booked a week for this place and i was already   kind of trying to convince luke to book a second 
week because this place is very unique and so   beautiful oh my god check this out guys this is 
probably the most stereotypically looking subway   for a mountain if you imagine subway on a mountain 
this is the picture that you would imagine walking along the main fashion street or 
the tourist street and we stumbled across   a very picturesque beautiful looking 
church and super interesting i'm not sure   from which century this is from but it's very 
very beautiful the weather actually at the moment   is very interchangeable it's 
pretty windy up here so the clouds   are moving very quickly so if we do have some 
shots here where it's super sunny and super   nice and then in the next clip it's very overcast 
that's why um this is all shot on the same day but   this church is absolutely stunning definitely 
going to have to check this place out this church here is absolutely stunning but what i 
think is really funny is that this church made it   into this century by accepting donations with visa 
so you can just tap your card here in the church   in order to give donations to it that's very 
funny well that church is absolutely stunning   inside the artwork on the walls and the amount 
of work in general that must have went into the   construction of that church it's beautiful 
super super good feeling as well when you're   standing in there and there's a couple of people 
in there saying some prayers too and overall very   interesting placement as well right here in the 
center of zakopane so let's let's keep exploring   and let's go maybe grab a bite to eat in a few 
as well i'm starting to feel a little bit hungry   because of the Zapiekanka disappointment that we 
had in the other video we decided to make a quick   pit stop here at Smaczek Smaczek i believe is how 
you pronounce it i don't know um but we will show   you the sign no we got two Zapiekankas luke went 
with the Diabelska i suppose that's kind of like   diabolo like a spicy type of zapiekanka and i went 
with the regionalna because i just thought it would   be something regional and it kind of looks like 
there's ham on there and smoked cheese and we   both went with garlic mayo and ketchup on top okay 
guys so this is actually my very first time trying   a zapiekanki or a zapiekanka super super excited 
i basically decided to go with garlic sauce and   some ketchup on my Diabelska zapiekanka so cheers 
guys let's give this a first impression bite oh wow saucy face as always very tasty 
there's just a little bit of spice in this   it might take a while for it to kick in but it 
is absolutely delicious the bread is kind of   toasted so you have that crunch it's nice and 
cheesy very stringy cheese i think it's like a   mozzarella type of cheese and that meat as well i 
think on this one there is if you can see it here   it's kind of almost like a pork bacon pork belly 
maybe absolutely delicious 10 out of 10 for me let's give the regionalna zapiekanka a try i 
think zapiekanki is plural and zapiekanka is   probably singular as far as i understood 
it i know i get so much criticism for   my interpretation of polish but i'm going to 
continue doing it regardless okay here we go wow that cheese it tastes like i suppose it is a kind of smoked 
cheese with some ham slash pork belly on it and   it looks like there's some mushrooms on 
there as well very interesting taste and oh yeah if you ever come to poland definitely 
try zapiekanka this is 10 out of 10 from me   as well so as naomi was saying in our last 
video when we explored kazimierz the jewish   quarter and Wawel castle we went on a search 
for some Zapiekanka and we never actually found any   because we went to the wrong plaza apparently we 
went to Wolnica plaza when we should have went to   nowy plaza thanks to you guys down in our comments 
for letting us know um unfortunately now   we're all the way out down here in zakopane but 
we're very very happy that we came across this   place because wow these guys are delicious 
and i am sure we are going to be gaining   a whole bunch of weight here in zakopane 
we're definitely going to have to do a   little bit of a hike in order to work all 
these calories off luckily we are blessed   we are absolutely surrounded by stunning 
mountains and hiking trails all around us our bellies are nice and warm and full of 
zapiekanka so the next thing that we're gonna   do is go for a nice long walk and explore some 
of these beautiful markets that are decorated all   throughout zakopane join us let's go markets 
are absolutely amazing we're just literally   walked into a random area here with a bunch of 
market stalls around and you can get a whole   assortment of different things from 
fridge magnets to antiques all the way to   polish traditional dresses and it's 
just incredibly interesting just to   walk around and have a look very unique 
we've been to quite a lot of markets   in our time traveling around and we've never 
actually seen one like this check out naomi   let's get a new head it suits you 
it's cute definitely suits naomi   let us know down in the comments if that hat suits 
naomi and you might see it in the next video   i think it's very warm though for spring slash 
summer time so maybe a winter type of hat yeah   and it is definitely getting on the warmer 
side of things here at the moment it is may   i understand zakopane is very typical for a 
winter destination but we're happy that we're here   at the time that we are because it's perfect 
we're planning on doing quite a lot of hikes   and checking out the nature that's around us 
just check out this stuff guys in this market   i'm assuming a lot of the stuff here is 
possibly handmade but very very beautiful   you can get traditional underwear 
if you want there you go guys for us right now we're basically wandering 
around the center this market stall   is literally just at the end of the street that 
we began the vlog in and definitely come   and check it out if you do get the chance 
while you are in zakopane beautiful place houston we have a problem we found 
a place that sells helium balloons   and i think the guy didn't even yeah he 
didn't even close it he was very well aware   of what is going to happen to that helium so 
i think luke wants to tell you guys something subscribe to the channel guys welcome to Poland in oh no welcome 
to poland subscribe to the channel let's explore zakopane oh my god on a serious note guys we 
have a lot more to explore let's go my voice sounds ridiculous we decided to quake it what we decided to take a quick detour on 
one of the smaller hills here and you see   all of these people being super 
prepared with like hiking shoes and   jackets and backpacks all of that equipment and 
we are up here on converse chucks and DC's that's a great great success me and naomi are 
actually just talking about this obviously so   many hiking trails around here and it's absolutely 
jaw dropping nature but you do see all these   people that are buying down in the center 
buying hundreds of euro worth of hiking gear   north face all of these types of brands and 
every hike i've ever gone on i just basically   picked the flattest pair of shoes that i have i'm 
always so unprepared but i usually regret that   decision the next day blisters and etc etc but we found this beautiful little hiking trail   um as you can see behind me absolutely stunning 
everywhere you look it's amazing snow-capped   mountains still even though it's may and 
there's also this cool little train thing   that carries passengers up to a certain summit so 
we were looking at maybe taking that but we don't   want to spend the money on the tickets oh i nearly 
fell um so we're gonna manually make our way up   as far as we can and try and get a nice view 
footually not manually footually that's a new word wow guys that was an absolutely stunning 
viewpoint that we stumbled across there we   managed to get the drone up in the air and 
take some pretty stunning shots of those   snow-capped mountains off in the 
distance and a little bit of the   central part of zakopane so now we're kind 
of just stumbling back down i'm trying to   watch my steps here as i'm going down so 
i don't face plant and roll down the hill   we're gonna make our way back in to the 
center have a little bit of a wander around   show you guys a little bit more of this beautiful 
town and then who knows come on come on come along so what's your first impressions so far anyways 
of zakopane what do you think i think zakopane is   absolutely stunning very very beautiful nature if 
you are into hiking or skiing i think this is the   place to be for you both of us definitely are i'm 
less of a city person more of a nature person so   zakopane just seems to be a really really good 
spot for the two of us yeah i couldn't agree more   zakopane blows both of our minds and even though 
we've been here now for such a short period of   time the slovakian guy is trying to kill us with 
his car yeah this guy here was reversing pulling   out i don't know what he was doing but yeah 
Zakopane really really is a must-see destination   if you ask us we were obviously we heard about 
this place a long long time ago i was actually   here as well when i was much younger i think i 
was around 15 16 years old so i don't have too   many strong memories of this place i do remember 
when i was here the last time it was freezing cold Zakopane is 100% check it out if you are planning on traveling 
to poland because this is actually a question   that we've gotten quite a bit is poland currently 
open yes absolutely fully open there is   currently absolutely no restrictions in place 
for you to travel to poland you don't need a   test you don't need anything so if you're looking 
for that must visit summer destination and you do   love yourself a little bit of nature mixed in with 
plenty of shopping and things to do add Zakopane   to your list as soon as you can um one question 
as well obviously we have a few things planned   here in the area already but if you do have 
any recommendations make sure to drop them down   in the comments below because obviously if you 
have some locals or some polish people that are   watching these types of videos they usually know 
more than we stupid tourists do okay you guys that   was our very first day of exploring here around 
zakopane get ready for a lot of more content from   zakopane and other areas in poland absolutely guys 
for now we are the two mad explorers and this is   your reminder to keep exploring we'll see you guys 
in the next adventure thanks for watching ciao thanks very much for watching 
this video we just launched our   community our channel memberships here on youtube 
so if you want to be part of this community make   sure to check out the benefits and perks down 
below all of this is only possible because of   you guys and with your support we will 
be able to keep going for a lot longer|||what's up you guys and welcome back to the channel 
this is a little extra video that we decided to   do because we received loads of messages from 
you guys over on instagram asking why we are in   poland and how safe poland actually is with the 
situation that is going on next door basically   how the situation is with refugees and 
immigrants and all of that obviously we   have only been in poland for two weeks we're 
nowhere near the border at the moment we're   in the south of poland actually in krakow and we 
just thought we might give you a little bit of a   walk and talk type of video just easy going to 
explain the situation at the moment yep absolutely   so we've been as naomi said in krakow now for two 
weeks we're coming up actually onto our third week   in poland tomorrow we're moving to a new town 
that's further south here in poland and we're   super excited to check that place out it's a very 
interesting place but as naomi said you guys have   been sending over message after message asking us 
what the situation is actually like because we are   well aware obviously of what's happening next door 
it's not that far away you can definitely feel   energetically here there has been kind of a shift 
in energy people are a little bit on the low side   vibrationally you can feel it in people they're 
a little bit on the fearful side going about   their daily life and we've been outside 
walking exploring seeing things around here   in krakow for quite some time i'm going to turn 
this around give you guys a little bit of a view   of what we're walking around in right now this is 
just a neighborhood where we are actually staying   at here in krakow it's a beautiful place lots of 
greenery and lots of locals actually around here   because that's something that i kind of want to 
touch on here at the start of this video a lot   of the accommodations here uh in and around all 
over poland actually has gone up in price airbnb   booking.com all of the typical places that you 
would book your accommodation they've all gone up   in price and that's simply to do with the higher 
influx of people that are coming into the country   immigration a lot of things a lot of different 
factors obviously inflation as well is happening   across all of europe currently at the moment 
so that's obviously going to factor in as well   in terms of the accommodation costs people raising 
their prices like we noticed we were in albania   not that long ago staying in an airbnb we 
booked a one month airbnb in a beautiful coastal   destination in albania and we only played we only 
paid 230 something euro for the entire month here   in poland we booked two weeks in krakow and we had 
to book a place that was well outside the center   and we paid a lot more than 230 euro we 
paid around 500 euro for those two weeks so   double the cost for two weeks less time in the 
place itself so that gives you an idea guys of the   cost of living it's definitely going up and i'm 
sure it is probably affecting or starting to   affect some of the locals here in poland generally 
speaking though the reason why we wanted to make   this video this little quick walk and talk video 
i'll turn you guys back around so you can see more   um poland is as safe as the rest of 
europe and what do i mean by that   i understand poland is very very close to the 
current situation that's going on next door   but if that situation does get any worse so if 
that situation does come across in to poland or if   the situation does come across into somewhere like 
romania or anywhere that's in the european union   all of europe is going to be involved 
in that situation so that's what i mean   poland is right now as of today today is the 18th 
of may 2022 and it is about as safe as the rest   of europe is so if you're in ireland england 
or sorry england's not a part of europe anymore   they got away from us ireland spain portugal 
france anywhere like that um you're about as safe   as we are right now walking through poland so 
think about it very true and um just in terms of   notable noticeable things maybe in krakow itself 
first of all check out this amazing market here   little look at my local market really cute and 
in terms of noticeable changes maybe that we see   at the moment here in krakow obviously you do see 
a lot of cars that have a ukrainian license plate   but that really doesn't really change much it 
says ua instead of pl on the license plate that   is about the extent of what you see in 
terms of cars you do see a lot of people   that have suitcases but um to be honest those 
people could be tourists as well unless you   walk up to that person listen to the language 
they're speaking so if you understand ukrainian   or you know what ukrainians sound like you 
might know okay these people are ukrainians   but unless you do that these people might as well 
be just normal tourists visiting poland you do   see loads of tourists such as germans italians 
turkish people whatever people from all over   the eu really visiting poland at the moment 
as well so these people that dog is not happy so you do see loads of tourists around here but 
they might be refugees or they might just be   normal tourists visiting the area so unless 
you actually walk up and ask them you wouldn't   know the difference really and it doesn't 
really give you a different feeling about   the city or the area as well they're just 
normal people coming from rough times   absolutely yeah we met a ukrainian guy 
as well when we were in albania and we   had a beer with him and the situation is 
horrible that's going it's going on over there   but there's nothing that we can do about 
it realistically being where we are and   there's nothing that the people of poland can do 
obviously the polish government can take action   and if they want the european union can take 
action if they want but that's all up to them   for us right now and for the people of poland 
i suppose all we can do is keep living exactly   so if you are sitting at home right now wondering 
can i visit poland this year to be honest if   you're from the european union i don't think 
that it makes that much of a difference if the eu   decides to get involved uh big time let's 
say with soldiers and weapons and whatever   all of the european union will be involved 
um and that's not only poland that's going   to be germany that's going to be sweden 
or denmark or france all of the countries   really and then everybody is at danger 
it's not only going to be poland per se   so yeah i do think poland is probably as safe 
right now as all of the eu yeah 100 guys so all these messages all these people 
that are worrying stuff like that war   um situations like war economic downturn 
stuff like that it's always going to happen   at some stage in everybody's life you're going to 
probably experience it if you're luckily enough   you won't experience it but all we can do right 
now is keep living keep exploring keep seeing   new countries if you do get the chance and 
we would actually encourage you guys to come   check out krakow check out the rest of poland if 
you do get the chance and what i would like to say   is well if you do come across ukrainians actually 
walk up to them and try and start a discussion   like try and start a conversation not necessarily 
a discussion um and understand what they feel like   what the situation is like for them because i do 
feel like a lot of them might be by themselves for   example um traveling by themselves and they just 
need somebody to talk to and not feel alone so   if you do meet somebody definitely walk up to them 
ask if you can help ask if they would just want to   grab a coffee somewhere and have a conversation 
just to understand really what it is like for them   and see if you can help maybe definitely guys 
so we're gonna keep this one short and sweet   my name is luke my name is naomi we are the two 
mad explorers and this is your reminder to keep   exploring see you guys in the next video thanks 
for watching bye bye everything that we do is   because of you guys thank you so much for watching 
this video this is a quick reminder that we   have started our channel memberships and you can 
join super quick and easy just go and click that   join button in our little channel banner 
slash whatever you call it and join up see   those perks and become a channel member today 
super cheap it's cheaper than a cup of coffee   at your local trendy hipster cafe situation so 
go check out those perks and support the channel|||welcome to the incredible city of krakow in 
this video i'm gonna tell you all the reasons   why you should definitely come here to krakow 
and what can you expect in this beautiful city   my name is fonsi and i've been 
traveling the world solo for 4 years   i'm here as part of my central european 
trip and i it's my first time in poland   this country is nothing like i imagined before 
and i have to say krakow is now one of my favorite   cities in europe poland is a country that 
has deep roots on christianity and you know   there's all sorts of amazing churches here 
in krakow and this is the city of saint mary   let's start this blog by entering the 
incredible gothic basilica of saint mary   right on the main square of krakow not too far from the city center and the 
main square you can find the vowel cathedral   this behind me are the fortified walls of 
babel which include the castle of wawel   and the cathedral of wawel 
which is the cathedral of   krakow it's such an incredible building 
it was built in the 14th century   the walls of babel are protected by 
a giant fire spitting dragon statue this castle and cathedral on top of a hill is in my opinion the most 
beautiful building in krakow now let's talk about food i'm doing 
a blog specifically about this   if i have posted it you can see it right 
here but food in poland is just amazing some of my favorite restaurants here in 
krakow are the pierogarnia krakowiazy   which is where i tried my first pierogi which 
is this kind of boiled dumplings filled of   meat apple or all kinds of feelings the Restauracja Polska which is where i tried 
my first bigos this stew served in this case   in a giant bread and finally this mysterious 
restaurant hidden in a library so we we are we   just entered this library right here in the center 
of krakow to actually go into a restaurant so like   this is the name of the restaurant and it's 
inside this building which is pretty incredible the best way to move 
around the city center is to go   by walking or you can use one of these strums 
right here if you want to to go anywhere around   the cities so walking is a great option trams will 
save you time if you're going from one uh point to   the other but all the main sites are here in the 
center of the city this is the main square the   main square of krakow is the center of the life 
in the city it has some of the most incredible   buildings of the city like the city hall or 
the sand mary's basilica that we saw before if you're someone that doesn't care about doing 
something a little bit touristy but still a lot   of fun i've seen a lot of couples and families 
ride these carriages which look majestic and   in a medieval town like this one it's just an 
incredible experience for sure and a great way   to see the city the main square of krakow is 
full of all kinds of traditional restaurants   bars and cozy cafes unlike other cities like 
for example in venice where you actually pay   a lot of money for a coffee this doesn't happen 
here in krakow so you can enjoy some nice coffee   in an environment like this one just enjoying 
the views and having a great time here   prices in poland are really really budget 
friendly so if you're backpacking on a budget   and you want to save some 
money while traveling europe   this is definitely your destination you 
know everything from accommodation to food   to things to do it's so affordable here 
compared to other central european capitals   when the night comes you can see 
the city in a very different light this square right here looks so nice right now 
this is the city hall of krakow that's right there   that right there it's the city hall tower which 
right now during the night has this kind of like   light display from the medieval ages to the effects 
of world war ii this city has seen   so much and has so much to tell it's also 
a great window to a different culture   different food and an amazing atmosphere 
that will definitely exceed your expectations   so that's it for this video of krakow i hope you 
enjoyed it uh this city is amazing i you know my   first it's my first time here in poland and i'm 
having so much fun and i hope you enjoyed this   video i'm gonna do more videos about you know uh 
things to do all around poland and just all about   my central europe trip in general so expect more 
videos coming really soon thank you for watching   make sure to subscribe give a like and as 
always i will see you guys in the next adventure  |||This video is made possible by viewers like you, over at Patreon. Click the link below to become a Patron today,
and help support the creation of more of these videos. Poland's post-1945 state was one, that was pretty unrecognizable, from anything that came before it. The most glaring detail was the new Republic's borders. The Soviet Union forcibly annexed the Eastern half of the nation, they had originally invaded in September of 1939. In compensation for this, they awarded Poland the territories of Silesia, Pomerania and Prussia from Germany. Multiples of millions of Poles and Germans were forcibly expelled from their respective homes, in the largest ethnic redistribution in history. [intro] After the war, the infamous Nuremberg trials tried the Nazi leaders for the Holocaust and war crimes, committed on Polish soil. The Soviets escaped similar trials for their own war crimes, since they joined the Allies in the late stages of the war. The Soviet regime would never answer for:
the Katyń massacre of 22,000 Polish officers, the deportation of 1.6 million POWs to Stalin's gulags,
or the rape and pillage committed by the Red Army. Poland remained behind the iron curtain,
as a puppet state for the Soviet Union. The Soviet regime set up the
Polish United Workers' Party, a communist party, creating what we
now call the Polish People's Republic. An important Eastern bloc member,
and buffer state to the West. The Warsaw pact signed in 1955,
as an opposition to NATO, gave the Bolsheviks greater control over Poland's army. The government of pre-war Poland remained in exile in the UK, and was refused to be recognized by Stalin. The Cold War loomed, as both East and West became nuclear powers. The Western allies secretly began talks, of starting a third war to defeat the Soviet Union, called "Operation Unthinkable". However, this was abandoned, as nuclear bombs
changed the nature of war completely. The first few years were the most brutal. Land, industry, and infrastructure, was seized by the government. And rather than wealth distribution and prosperity; the resulting brand of socialism simply created a method of resource and value extraction to the Soviet Union. This was called the "Stalinist Era",
an era characterized by untold poverty. In true Iron Curtain-fashion, Poland stood close
to the front lines of a clash of ideology. ["Vietnamese - we stand with you!"]
["Away with Zionists aka. imperialistic agents!"]
The student strike in 1968 against the regime was brutally suppressed. This decade would also see, 
what remained of Poland's Jewish population, emigrate en masse to Israel,
ending the Jewish chapter in Polish history. By 1970, the port cities of Gdańsk,
Gdynia and Szczecin exploded in protests, as these areas were subject to particularly
harsh working and living conditions. The government would crack down, and protests
would continue in 1976, and again in 1980, by which point, the government
was 20 billion dollars in debt. Lech Wałęsa started the first workers' union, called "Solidarity", quickly becoming a political lobbyist group for change. "Solidarity" organized the first nationwide workers' strike, in 1981. The government tried in vain to enact
martial law, to stop the spread of chaos. However, the winds of change
were upon the Eastern bloc. And in the 1989 election, the communists lost nearly all of the allowable contested seats in Parliament. The wheel began turning, and change was inevitable. The communist party was disbanded,
the Constitution amended, and the centralized control of the economy was abolished. The government in exile was finally allowed to return home. Since then, things have changed pretty drastically. In 1999, the 3rd Polish Republic officially joined NATO,
signaling a huge westward shift in foreign policy. By 2004, they became part of the European Union,
helping stabilize the growing economy. It has been a very long and hard road for Poland. The very center of World War II tensions in Poland had left the nation in rubble, only to be then absorbed into the oppressive regime, of Stalin's communist bloc. A common observation, made by
no less than Winston Churchill, is that, while the war had brought an end to totalitarianism and tyranny in Western Europe, in Eastern Europe, it had really only just begun. And sometimes it's important to remember that. Poland's post-communist prosperity, has made it
one of the Eastern bloc success stories. And who knows? Maybe one day,
"Poland can into space". Thank you for watching the short
conclusion to the story of Poland. Like and subscribe, and if you really like the show,
please consider supporting on Patreon. Until next time.|||today we're in the beautiful baltic city of 
Gdańsk and we're going to be exploring around   this stunning place with you guys today so 
come along with us right now i am in front   of this beautiful statue of neptune and he is 
looking pretty heroic if you don't mind me saying   and it's a beautiful emblem for this incredible 
city because it does have such an expansive   maritime history and both of us are very 
excited to check this place out it's been   it's been on both of our lists now for quite 
some time literally since we got to poland we   were like we need to go and explore the tri-cities 
and a lot of you guys have commented saying that   we needed to come up here so that's exactly why 
we're here let's go and explore beautiful Gdańsk so right now we are in Długi Targ where you have 
the beautiful statue and fountain of neptune and   this really seems to be one of the main tourist 
attractions here you can hear loads and loads   of different languages i think we have never 
seen so many tourists and so many english speakers   german speakers french speakers and so on in 
all of poland so i think Gdańsk is one of the   most popular cities here in poland and here 
from Długi Targ you can have a beautiful view   onto the old town hall and which at the moment 
accommodates a museum and you can even go   all the way up to the tower so maybe 
that's something that we're going to do   just to get a little bit of 
a better overview of the city all right guys so we just got our tickets for 
the tower in the old city hall of Gdańsk and we're   going to make our way up now to this tower it 
supposedly has some of the best views that you can   get over Gdańsk so let's go and do it literally the 
second we made it up to tower and the sun came out   before it was a little bit cloudy here and there 
but now it's beautiful sunshine and oh my god let   me tell you something it's so beautiful up here 
you can see so incredibly far into the distance   it kind of feels like you get a whole overview 
of poland basically from here and all you can   see are those beautiful red tile roofs of the old 
city itself and you can even see very far into the   distance kind of the cranes of the port and so on 
so this is definitely a worthy start of the video   my god the views are just absolutely mind-blowing 
i cannot get over the panoramic 360 views that   you get when you get towers like this the last 
place that we had this was in Toruń and it was   simply spectacular as well this one i think is 
a little bit higher than the tower in Toruń   we definitely had to walk up a whole bunch of 
steps and we were severely out of breath for quite   some time but the views are very very much worth 
every single penny it is around 12 złoty per person   to get up here for this view and definitely 
do it if you do get the chance while you're   here in Gdańsk because it offers a stunning view 
down over Długi Targ or the long market street   you can see down very clearly all along the 
street you can see the people bustling about   and it is just absolutely amazing well well well 
worth it from this tower here as well you get this   stunning view over to saint mary's basilica which 
is the largest red brick church in all of poland   and as you can see here i even saw some people 
on the top of that tower so maybe we can go over   there and check out that tower as well because it 
seems to be a little bit higher than the one of   the old town hall but yeah you get this stunning 
view and you can really appreciate how beautiful   the basilica stands here in Gdańsk the 
streets of Gdańsk are characterized by this   beautiful cobblestone walking through these 
streets you are really reminded of the history   of this baltic port city a lot of it was sadly 
flattened during world war ii but since then   obviously a lot of it has been rebuilt to look 
similar to the way it did before that war and you   can see a lot of the history as i said in these 
beautiful streets we just had a look around saint   mary's basilica here in Gdańsk and oh my god it's 
so so stunning from the inside it's completely   white um i think i've never seen that actually in 
a church that it's completely white on the inside   just with like golden accents everywhere so it's 
beautifully decorated from the inside it looks   very peaceful very uplifting and you can indeed 
go up the tower of saint mary's basilica as well   i believe it was 14 złoty to go up but we just came 
down the other tower so we don't want to go up   another 82 meters of staircase and so we're maybe 
going to do that later or tomorrow on our own time we just had to take some cash out we just arrived 
to the beautiful river Wisła here in Gdańsk and   we're gonna go and try and get ourselves a 
boat the boat leaves now in approximately   five minutes so we should you should be able 
to catch this one stress stress stress stress   but yeah there's plenty of different types of 
boats that are just floating around have a look but this one over here is the one that 
we are trying to catch so let's go let's go now if you're coming here 
on a day where the weather   changes quite a bit make sure that you bring 
a jacket or maybe even a rain poncho because we   just got absolutely soaked in rain so so 
wet right now it is just pummeling rain   out of the sky so we came here this seems to 
be like an exchange of people getting off and   on so we came up here to get a seat under the 
roof of the upper deck and thankfully we did   the seat is still absolutely soaked though but 
it's it's fine it will be good the views all   along here are just amazing yeah and depending on 
how full the ship is as well you might not even   get a place under the roof so that's why we kind 
of got wet for a while because we had to stand   outside without the roof this this boat as 
well is it goes from Gdańsk to Westerplatte   which is kind of where world war ii actually began 
it was the first clash first battle between poland   and germany in world war ii so crazy amount 
of history and all along here you see so many   beautiful things like the Gdańsk shipyard where 
they repair boats coming in and out of Gdańsk it's   so cool it's amazing so right now you can even see 
one of the larger boats that have been for repair   in Gdańsk being pulled out by several smaller 
boats it kind of looks like maybe three   or four smaller boats are pulling it out into the 
baltic sea which is super super interesting to see that boat experience was 
one of a kind definitely   two thumbs up from us it also stopped raining 
the second we touched ground again so yeah   literally as soon as the boat trip was over 
it stopped raining but throughout the entire   throughout the entire trip on the boat itself it 
was just lashing down really really heavily rain   so we spent the majority of it trying to look for 
cover on the boat but nonetheless we captured some   really nice footage for you guys and that boat 
trip is definitely worth every second now we're   getting pretty hungry so we're gonna go and 
try and find a nice restaurant to get some food   here in beautiful Gdańsk let's go these buildings 
over here are really really interesting looking   it kind of reminds me and naomi of the 
Speicherstadt which we saw in hamburg   not too long ago you'll probably use these 
people with balloons are everywhere as well   they have just these giant long strings 
of balloons and me and naomi have been hit   in the head multiple times we got smacked in the 
face with balloons several times but yeah those   buildings are really interesting and we went to 
hamburg made like a little bit of a stop over   there and it looks like the Speicherstadt area in 
hamburg so that's really interesting so we made   our way into a milk bar it's actually called milk 
bar Stągiewna and it seems to be incredibly popular with   a lot of polish people around here have a look 
around the restaurant right now it's absolutely   packed we have no idea what we're going to order 
but we're just going to pick something at random   off the menu and then we're going to go and enjoy 
some food you can find milk bars pretty much all   over poland and to be honest these are usually our 
favorite restaurants because you are guaranteed to   get a pretty large meal for a very small amount of 
money just to give you an example we just got two   kotlet schabowy which is pretty much schnitzel 
with with some potatoes and dill on the side   and we paid 48 złoty in total which is like around 
10 euro and for two huge meals which is absolutely   amazing those two meals were really really tasty 
as well so in case you do come to Gdańsk make sure   to check out this milk bar here and just to give 
you a little bit of context with the milk bars as   far as we understood the milk bars are kind of a 
leftover of communism itself so those were usually   the types of places where you could get a large 
meal for a little amount of money right yeah and   the name itself as far as i'm aware the name milk 
bar comes from cheese curd or cheese leftovers   and that was because in the times of communism 
meat itself was very rare and difficult   to come by and it all kind of ties in together 
this is exactly why we tried to find ourselves   a milk bar to visit here in Gdańsk because Gdańsk 
itself was where the fall of communism started in   poland which is pretty magnificent and yeah milk 
bars perfect place to go if you do want to spend   just a little bit of money but you want to fill 
up your tummy something that we like to do on   our channel every now and then as well for you 
guys especially for our polish viewers is to   give you guys exactly what a certain place looks 
like during a certain time so we just turn the   camera around and give you the raw and other feel 
of what the place is currently like at the moment   and today it is a relatively rainy wednesday 
here in Gdańsk but we may as well show you guys   what the beautiful long market or Długi Targ 
area looks like here in Gdańsk so check it out oh we are such children we walked past 
the sweet factory store called the dansk   sweet factory and we decided to go in and get 
ourselves some pick and mix very first time   actually we managed to walk past these types 
of stores for one and a half years and today   was just a day where we were like okay we need 
to go and grab ourselves some candy we gave in initially we were planning on taking you to the 
baltic sea right now but because the weather is   only so-so and we made the decision to 
come to this mall here which is called   forum check this out they have a little 
river inside of the mall how cool is that i'm sure however that we will be taking you to 
the baltic sea in the next two videos because   one of them is going to be from sopot and the 
other one is going to be from gdynia right yeah   we are in the tri cities and this is our first 
stop of the tri-cities beautiful Gdańsk and we   cannot wait to check out the other two that mall 
forum Gdańsk is a really interesting and unique   mall the architecture in there is just something 
else and we've never seen a mall like that that   just has a river cutting through the mall all 
really interesting and plenty of things to check   out there we just went in because it started 
raining once again unfortunately the weather   is not on our side today but speaking of shopping 
Gdańsk is known as the amber capital of the baltics   so there's plenty of places to you can go and get 
yourself beautiful amber souvenirs all over this   amazing city by the way here in Gdańsk and all over 
poland and the larger cities really you find these   crazy super malls pretty much everywhere but 
not only one of them usually several ones of   them so for example here in Gdańsk we just went to 
that forum mall but there's also a mall very very   close to us which i believe is called the galeria 
bałtycka or something like that which is equally   large like so big that you can genuinely get lost 
in there so in case you do forget something when   you have when you get to poland there's always the 
option to stock up on stuff that you might need alright guys so great thing to know if you are 
going to be coming and staying in Gdańsk there is a   tram that connects a lot of the city and we are 
staying in an airbnb that's just outside of Gdańsk   so that saved us quite a bit of money if you do 
want to stay directly in the center obviously   it's going to be a little bit more money so we 
ended up getting a place just outside of Gdańsk and   saved ourselves a good bit so we are just using 
the tram now to get back to our accommodation   but yeah this is this was our kind of quick 
first impression of Gdańsk city of Gdańsk   and it is absolutely a beautiful place 100 worth 
visiting in my personal opinion what do you think   i couldn't agree more with you i feel 
like Gdańsk has a very very unique   charm to it especially the architecture 
and the river itself and even the boat cruise that   we did today even though the weather was not 
great it was an absolutely unique experience   and i do recommend for you to do that as 
well even though the weather might be bad   but yeah guys for now my name is luke my name 
is naomi and we are the two mod explorers and   this is your reminder to keep exploring i will see 
you guys in the next video thanks for watching bye|||test i'm veronica from welcome home and today i will tell you what you really have to know before coming to poland [Music] these seven things i consider as the basics for the very beginning first of all the documents i know nobody likes them but they are the basics if you are from european union norway iceland liechtenstein or switzerland you don't need any extra documents or permission to come to poland and you can stay here up to three months if you need a visa there are two basic types type c and d type c allows you to stay in poland up to three months and type d up to a year to apply for it go to a polish consulate in your country the usual waiting time is about 15 days but depending on how many people applies for a visa the whole process might take even up to a few months so better don't wait till the last moment i guess many of you are coming to poland because of a new job if so make sure your employer applied for a work permit for you in advance when applying for a visa take this document with you based on this you can get a visa with a permission to work and don't forget that you have to prove that you have enough money to live here and in case of coming back to your country you also have that money once you are already in poland you have to make some documents and permissions but don't worry i'll make a separate video about this later on don't forget about second most important thing health insurance in case of getting any type of visa you will need a travel health insurance a list of approved companies you will find on our government's website of course is in the link below remember that this kind of insurance usually covers only the emergencies and is valid as long as your visa is later on switch to public or private health insurance as a worker on employment or fee for a task contract you will receive a public health care automatically all eo citizens can apply for european health insurance card and get an access to health care in all eu countries just don't forget to apply for it still in your country number three renting a flight you can search on your own on the internet or you can choose an agency just mine that they might have a commission fee i'll talk about renting a flat in a separate video so stay tuned the rental price with utilities is about one thousand water for a room in a short apartment two thousand slotted for a studio or two and a half thousand water for one bedroom apartment of course everything depends on the city and location but these are average and don't forget about the deposit it's one two or three months rent and must be returned to you after the rental lastly the rental time usually a minimum rental time is full year but it's not impossible to find a place for three or six months but just mind that it might be more expensive what else you have to know always sign an agreement and make sure that utilities are included in the rent so you don't have to sign an agreement with providers on your own number four money now let's talk about money poland has its own currency police lotte the ratio is around 3.77 zloty to one us dollar and 4.56 zloty to 1 euro you must know that we really love to pay by card or phone or watch so almost every shop and service point has a terminal even like small local stores or farmers markets seriously don't bring a lot of cash with you it's still in use of course but if you need some cash there are thousands of atms all over the country if you don't want to lose money on currency exchange get yourself a bank account in polish lotte you can do it still in your country just check out a revolut or polish bank where you can open a bank account with a selfie important we don't use personal checks so rather leave them at home as for prices the price for services is cheaper than in other countries of western europe especially for those who are earning euros or us dollars five shopping we can get almost everything here in poland you can buy things from all over the world if not in shops then online so don't bring a lot of stuff with you one more important thing to remember on sundays big malls and supermarkets are closed only small convenient ones can stay open but don't worry we have a lot of them especially our chain japka which is almost everywhere number six language most of us speak english especially young people and those who live in the city some better some words but don't worry we will communicate if you want try learning some basic polish words it will make your life a little bit easier and we will love you for that number seven transport public transport is especially well developed in silesia and metropolis where i live and work but also in other large cities like krakow dynasty and of course in capital poland warsaw but if you would like to have a car go ahead as an eos citizen you can drive here with your own driving license if you are not you have to apply for international driving license still in your country now good news for travelers if you like to visit our largest cities and tourist spots you can easily get there by bus or train it's very convenient we also have a few airports and low cost airlines so getting to largest european cities and countries it's quite easy and not too expensive as for now we have no idea what covert will bring but in general poland is a great base for traveling across europe so take the chance okay it's time to sum up to make your move to poland way easier i made a checklist that you can follow three months before coming to poland get a travel health insurance make sure your company applies for a work permit for you apply for a visa if needed two months before coming to poland start searching for a flat learn some basic polish words one month before coming to poland get a european health insurance card if you are an eu citizen get yourself a polius lotte bank account and debit card book a ticket to paul you can also download the checklist in editable file so you can follow all the steps and even print it if you prefer it's down in the description these are the most important things for now to know before moving to poland it also applies for many other countries in european union which proves that we are quite like our european neighbors and there is no need to worry if you need more information or have any questions leave a comment down below and don't forget to check our website where you will find all the links and important documents mentioned in this video the link is of course in the description stay tuned for our next video moving to katowice residence permit peso and other documents required after coming to poland see you [Music] soon|||Hi I'm Colleen Kelly, and this is 
"Family Travel." Welcome to Poland. The Wieliczka Salt Mine is over 700 years old, 
and it's as deep as the Eiffel Tower is tall. You know, there's a lot of ways to see the Tatra 
Mountains, but this is one of my favorites.|||welcome to Gdynia we are here in this beautiful 
polish port city today exploring around and what   a better place to be than right here on this 
amazing ferris wheel with this beautiful view   over the amazing port itself let's go and explore 
Gdynia come on it's just a little bit windy up here now Gdynia is the third and final city in the 
tri-cities that we are checking out we're actually   very excited to check this place out we genuinely 
thought that we would only have time to check out   Gdańsk and just simply because of time restrictions 
and booking on airbnb and stuff is getting a   little bit expensive obviously it's july and this 
is the go-to summer area destination in poland   but we are very very happy because all of 
the tri-cities are very easily accessible   from train we just basically got the inter-city 
train over here and it literally takes just like   15 to 20 minutes from Gdańsk to get here on the 
train very cheap very accessible and check this   beautiful place out we have nice weather 
today thankfully the last few days actually   over the last week we've been getting a lot 
of summer storms so we've been sitting inside   pondering about how we're going to get videos out 
but thankfully the sun is out and it's on our side   today so let's go and check this place out more 
now at the moment here in Gdynia you have an event   going on which is called the sailing weeks so 
there's loads and loads of people here in the bay   at the moment sailing on their boats around the 
bay and you have loads and loads of little kind of   stages all over the harbor really with for example 
music there's a fun fair happening and loads and   loads of things to do so i think it's going to 
be an amazing day checking out the city of Gdynia Gdynia is one of the youngest of the tri-cities 
so you have Gdańsk sopot and Gdynia and Gdynia is   the youngest of the three of them and 
it's also the youngest city in all of   poland which makes it obviously a very modern 
city nowadays and it is furthermore the main   port baltic sea port of poland since world 
war one now there's three beaches that are   worth talking about here in Gdynia there's 
Plaża Miejska
 or the main beach of Gdynia there's Plaża   orłowo which is in the orłowo area which 
apparently has some incredible cliffs   that you can go and check out really wild 
nature there and then there's also Osada Rybacka   which is supposedly a pretty wild beach area where 
you can also go and check out pretty conveniently   i believe from Gdynia now we just spent a few 
minutes wandering around the main beach of Gdynia   and it is a beautiful place the beach is the beach 
itself is very clean and there's plenty of people   out enjoying their day here it is a very sunny 
and beautiful saturday afternoon so i can see why right here we have this incredible ship museum 
and it's called Statek-muzeum Dar Pomorza  i don't know if i'm pronouncing that one correctly 
but this is a very interesting ship that has   certainly been through a lot in history it 
actually circumnavigated around the world   which took roughly around 12 months for it 
to complete also during world war ii it was   in stockholm in sweden it was also built in 
hamburg germany and it is a really beautiful   looking ship for sure and i believe there's 
actually two of these ship museums and   they are kind of the main pull or the main 
attraction for a lot of people visiting Gdynia   actually just right next to that ship museum 
that i just spoke about there's another one right   here and it appears to be like a destroyer 
ship or a ship that carried very a lot of   artillery a lot of weapons and you can see that 
just at the front they have kind of these like   turret guns or gatling guns at the front and it 
does look like a very strong ship you do not want   to mess with the people that are on board this 
vessel there definitely seems to be somewhat of a   torpedo as well on the ship now i have absolutely 
no idea about the history of this particular   destroyer ship if any of you guys do know please 
let us know down below in the comments we would   love to hear more about this but it is very 
interesting very beautiful looking as well the   same as the other ship the other ship just appears 
to be quite a bit older but this ship nonetheless   is very beautiful and it is also painted 
in a pretty interesting color as well   it is by the way i just read it there you probably 
saw me in the back and it is the oldest preserved   destroyer in the entire world so and it was 
active during world war ii so that's definitely   very interesting there you go guys learn this is 
why travel is the best education in the world and   this is why we're so grateful to have been able 
to visit the tri-cities here in poland because   we've learned so much just in the last hour of 
exploring around this amazing port city area being   here in Gdynia on a busy saturday afternoon with 
this beautiful weather as well it's truly just   a good time good vibe everybody's just enjoying 
themselves there's plenty of different markets and   things that you can buy souvenirs wise or if you 
need some stuff for the beach like this stuff here   you're sorted there's also this big sort 
of get-together as naomi was saying it is   sailing week so there's plenty of action going 
on there's so many different rides that you can   go on we saw some pretty crazy ones but we kept 
it pretty tame by just taking the ferris wheel   i have an awful fear of heights so i'm definitely 
not going on any of the crazy adrenaline ones and   there's plenty of different places for you to 
grab a snack or a bite to eat there's literally   food stalls everywhere and now we're going to make 
our way towards a promenade area just past the   main beach area i just love hearing the people 
in the back screaming and enjoying their life   it's so funny good time good vibe 
that's what i'm getting here from Gdynia   as always in most of our videos now here 
in poland we're gonna just give you guys   a real world view of what the 
place or destination that we're in   looks like right now so check out beautiful Gdynia 
on a saturday afternoon in july here you go guys there's plenty of places that you can go and 
grab yourself some nice quick fast food snacks   this fritky place actually there's plenty of 
those fritky places they seem to be very popular   see a lot of people eating them at the moment 
for sure around the beach areas and everywhere all   over poland you see Gofry yeah those waffles 
so like belgian waffles with like toppings such   as like ice cream or maybe just cherries or fruit 
or something like that and you see them all over   poland they seem to be really popular here yeah we 
actually haven't tried one of those yet so let us   know if they're actually worth trying down in the 
comments guys but yeah this is what Gdynia looks   like right now plenty of people out and about 
enjoying their saturday especially this guy here love corgis so right now we are on Kamienna Góra
 which is a 
very long panoramic walkway just off of the coast   here in Gdynia and you can really see loads 
and loads of ships going in and out of the   main port here in Gdynia but you can also see 
all of the ships that are heading towards   Gdańsk which is really really cool to see i 
think it's a little bit of a pity that we were   so unfortunate with the weather this week and like 
the entire week that we were here as luke already   said it has been kind of raining on and off and 
even when it's not raining it is not that warm   and it has been kind of 20 to maybe 25 
degrees celsius for the last week so we   didn't really get the chance to enjoy being 
at the baltic sea and actually go for a swim   i believe there are probably a lot of people that 
do go for a swim but for us it was a little bit   too cold unfortunately now my first impressions 
of Gdynia is that it is a very very laid-back city   directly here at the baltic sea and i kind of feel 
like Gdynia has a lot to offer so if you do love   the ocean and just spend some time by the sea and 
this is definitely the place for you what i really   appreciate about Gdynia is that you also have the 
options to enjoy the city life so you do have   larger malls and just like the general city here 
as well so it is not only a laid back town by the   sea you can also enjoy the city life of it what do 
you think about Gdynia i love it i think it's   we went and we checked out sopot 
just yesterday actually so you probably   if you haven't already i hope you've checked 
out our sopot video and our Gdańsk video as well   this is our third and final tri-city as i said and 
yeah definitely gives off a new modern style vibe   and when you compare it to places such as Gdańsk 
Gdańsk obviously has quite a detailed history and   you will find quite a lot of historical buildings 
in Gdańsk and what i'm finding is the more sort   of away from Gdańsk towards sopot towards Gdynia you 
find less and less history and more modernization   more sort of buildings that are specifically 
geared towards tourism and towards you know   attracting people to come to the baltic sea and to 
enjoy um specific seasons such as the summer now   and you can see that it's definitely doing its job 
Gdynia has certainly attracted a lot of people we're   hearing a lot of tourists speaking english french 
german etc scandinavians as well all over the   place here and similar we saw the same in sopot so 
they're definitely doing the right job the tourist   offices i'm sure are working hard at 
promoting these specific areas and you   can see what is attracting people here you do 
have beautiful beaches obviously a lot of the sand   is sort of put there man-made but the beach 
it's beach itself is impeccably clean the one   that we saw anyways here in Gdynia for me if i 
was to pick a favorite out of the tri-cities   i immediately would pick sopot and that's just 
being my honest opinion i would put sopot first   then next up i would probably put Gdańsk and last 
place actually would be here there's no specific   reason for that it's just a general feeling 
a general vibe this promenade and everything   around here is fantastic but i think when you 
compare it to the history in a place such as Gdańsk   the things that you can do in Gdańsk and then 
similarly in sopot i believe in sopot there is   just in general it gives off a slightly more  attractive vibe for me personally speaking   let us know what you think what's your favorite 
out of the tri-cities but that is my list what's   your list my list would probably be Gdańsk 
in number one as well but just because i'm very   much as you probably know by now into history and 
historic architecture so older buildings and stuff   like that so that's why i put Gdańsk in number one 
number two i would probably put Gdynia and number   three sopot um but Gdynia and sopot are pretty much 
on the same level actually for me i just feel like   a lot of people in sopot kind of have a 
lot of money and it is kind of the place to   be and if you're more on the affluent side 
in terms of your wallet and if you like   Gdynia is a little bit more um for regular people 
which i feel like makes it very charming yeah 100% so make sure if you haven't already this is 
why we're making these videos from poland guys   a lot of people live in europe and i'm myself 
i'm european naomi european we're both european   citizens and you get a lot of these typical 
travel destinations during the summer time   such as spain and portugal and greece 
etc you can the list goes on forever   but very rarely does any of my family friends 
etc acquaintances say they never really say   oh i'm going to go to the baltic sea in poland for 
the summer and i suppose why we're making these   videos is just to give you guys a specific 
insight into what people like us how we   would view these specific areas when you're 
comparing them to other places that we have   available to us there's a reason why we came to 
poland and that's because we are genuinely curious   about why not that many other europeans are coming 
here such as somewhere like spain for example   but i feel like that's generally a pretty big 
topic on our channel anyway and we're usually   trying to go to the places where people would not 
necessarily pick it as their number one such   as poland such as albania such as the backlands 
of mexico where we were before and i feel like   we're just trying to give these places a little 
bit more of exposure and really show you guys what   these cities have to offer now Gdynia is obviously 
a lot more than just a pretty port with some nice   beautiful beaches there's plenty of shopping that 
you can do while you're here in Gdynia as well   and this is one of the main shopping 
streets called Ulica Świętojańska   all the way down here you just have rows and 
rows of beautiful shops lots of shopping malls   and it stretches all the way down here as well we 
actually started the day off in a mall a nice big   mall and we had ourselves a polish buffet as well 
so don't think that you're going to be short on   things to do when it comes to shopping etc here 
in Gdynia there's plenty so that was our first   impressions of Gdynia this station that we're in 
now the Dworzec it's very old very cool looking   but yeah that's it from us for today my name is 
luke my name is naomi we are the two mad explorers   and this is your reminder to keep exploring see 
you in the next video guys thanks for watching  |||is poland an expensive country when going out how much will you pay for food and drink or for later term activities no matter if you plan to relocate here for the long term or you just plan to visit our country i'll guide you through the most common costs to add to your living or travel budget also i'll tell you about our polish past-time activities today we are going to have a lot of fun together [Music] test i'm veronica from welcome home and i want you to discover and understand my country poland some time ago i was talking about basic monthly expenses in poland at that time i also promised to talk about dining out and leisure prizes and here we go well it's june summer is just around the corridor and we all want to be outside to enjoy the season paul's like everybody love to have fun and enjoy their free time but when it comes to how we spend our free time there are some things that you might find quite surprising or even funny let me tell you a bit more about them and get ready and have a nice time in poland how do posts spend their free time oh well weather in poland is the most important factor when planning our activities now in the summer most of us spend our free time outside we go for a walk or a drink we ride a bike we literally can't eat at home and what do we do most often we barbecue well having a barbecue is our national pastime if you even have a tiny patio or a balcony you prepare a barbecue at your place if not you go to the park be careful here is not allowed to do so at all public places a typical polish barbecue menu is kielbasa or a grilled piece of fork along with mustard ketchup and white bread don't forget about cold beer this menu is also an economic option you do the shopping sometimes even including a single used grill for 20s lotte and you invite your friends to join if you are curious about other polish characteristics check our blog link is in the description in the colder months we just love to meet at home an organized party called domovka from the words dom house in polish then everybody brings something to eat or their hot cooks and other brings drinks so remember in the summer barbecue in the winter don't move cup now the question is do we even go out sure we do let me tell you more about those prices and customs going out for a coffee in poland when we want to meet up with someone in the afternoon we meet free coffee even if we don't drink coffee in the evening we meet for a beer but let me get back to the evening customs in a second first coffee we mostly drink italian types of coffee american or cappuccino for about 12 15 lotte espresso is about six eight alternative brewing types are also more and more popular chemex are operas or drip the price for better types a little bit higher up to 20 zloty yes we've got starbucks here and yes it's more expensive than our local places so it's better to choose a local place and what if not coffee then tea it's also extremely popular in poland and every cafe also has its own menu english flavors green tea even fruity prices vary from eight zloty for a cup to around 15 for a pot along with coffee we love to have a sweet treat from polish cheesecakes and apple buys for templates lotto to fancy desserts for 20 per portion and if you go for a walk you have to grab an ice cream here again we prefer italian style gelato from 500 per scoop prices in a restaurant we post love guess what italian food we have it for lunch dinner and get together with friends for pizza pizzerias are probably the most common type of restaurant in poland the cause of a pizza in poland is from 20 plus other for a simple margarita to even 40 for your fancier pizza with lots of ingredients recently the most popular type is neopolitan pizza how yummy and one serving of pasta goes between zlatan the second type of food we love when eating out are burgers from classic beef to vegetarian ones the cost of a burger is around where it is lotte french fries included what else do we like sushi this will be a little bit more expensive but still we really like to go out for sushi the price per person is around 50 zloty counting two rolls per person what about polish food polish pierogi are 25 fertilizer a pork chop called hapova is around 40 and the classic side division dinner is around 50. if you visit salisha you will have to try it and what's included in the silesian dinner check the post in the description many restaurants offer a lunch menu that includes two courses but sometimes a dessert and a beverage the price around where it is lottie which is actually a good value for the money dinner for two is a good restaurant will cost you around two 200 zlatan with drinks what about the tip i'll tell you about it and other important things at the end of this video it's worth waiting for are you vegetarian or vegan no problem any larger polish city has some vegetarian food places it's also completely normal that even regular restaurants offer some plant-based dishes to choose from you'll find everything here of course bigger cities have better choices where to eat cheap in poland yes we've got mcdonald's kfc burger king in poland but why eat at a fast food chain when you have a cheap tasty and healthier polish food if you'd like to know what polish home cooking tastes like go to bar literally a milk bar this is a low cost food place that was popular during the communist era providing government subsidized traditional cuisine and now they are back there you can have a soup for less than tens latte pierogi or platsky for 15th latte a piece of meat with side dish is 20 plus lotte in a regular restaurant you will pay twice as much of course there is no fancy interior and you order at the bar but it might be a perfect place for a quick and tasty lunch in poland you will also easily buy kebabs french fries and hot dogs they should cost around 10 zloty more or less depending on size but there is one more polish treat on the go you have to try zapikanka according to wikipedia is a toasted open-faced sandwich made of a sliced baguette topped with sauteed mushrooms cheese and ham served hot with ketchup and what one looks like because 10 20 is lots depending on ingredients barn and pups prices in poland time for a night out as i said the most common way to spend the evening is to meet up or a beer a beer polish pivo is also the polish word that most foreigners know remember vietnam people de ba piva oh yes now we are ready to come to poland when just asking for a beer you will receive a 500 milliliter glass dough pivot a small one is normally 300 milliliters the most common type of beer in poland is the classic pale lager and the best known polish brands are teschevitz the price for a big glass of this is around 10 slotted we also have more and more small craft beer brands and multi-tab bars to try them they might be more expensive up to 20 zloty but they are really worth the price poland is a big country with good beers and vodka well yes mostly at old style weddings there are bars selling shots of vodka for five zloty but most young people prefer to meet for something lighter and we do like flavored vodkas especially lemon or chili flavored a polish staple as i said younger generations prefer to media for a cocktail or wine aperol spritz is around 25 and a glass of wine is 15 to 20. is it a lot for someone earning in euro or us dollars well maybe not but drinking out is quite expensive for polls that's why we have already moved up tips payments and other need to knows listen carefully now so we won't make a fappa in a restaurant with a self-service everybody pays for themselves in the restaurant it depends on how we agree and the relationship between everybody in most cases everybody pays for themselves also but sometimes one person pays the bill and the rest pay them back sometimes we also split the bill equally remember you can pay by cars literally everywhere in poland a tip is around 10 of total bill but it's voluntary we don't add this to the bill as in italy or us it's usually left on the table after we pay the bill in cash of course you can ask the waiter to add this to your bill but it's not common after the dinner we would rather not ask for a coffee or extra dessert we usually have one drink or boo or cotton along with our meal in the evening we meet around 8 p.m most restaurants close at 10 or 11 p.m pubs are open until midnight or 1am and cocktail bars until 2 or even 3am and if partying so long don't forget to grab a zapikanka when going back home i think that's enough for now have you already got an appetite for poland i hope so here i have three more suggestions for you to get ready visit other welcome home media where we share recommendations and pieces of advice about poland leisure food there are also some very useful guides for expats and tourists all the links are in the description let us know in the comments if there is something you would like to know remember to subscribe to this channel it will be the best tip you can give us and now pack your stuff and come poland is a beautiful country and we can't wait to see you here|||Have you ever wondered what would happen if
a bunch of ants fell down a hole into an old Cold War bunker
with no way out? No? Just me? Well, while this sounds a bit like the beginnings
of an entomology-themed horror film, it really
happened! And how these ants acted under such extreme circumstances can tell us about what those
ants do normal– because even trapped in a nightmare, they
kept on ant-ing. [♪ INTRO] Allow me to set the scene. It’s the early twenty-tens in Poland, in a long abandoned Soviet bunker that once
housed nuclear missiles during the Cold War. Inside the bunker is a colony of wood ants. Although, I use the word colony loosely here because these ants didn’t choose the bunker
life. This bunker is underground and covered over with trees and dirt as camouflage. Inside, it’s cold, dark, and mostly empty
after being sealed off and made illegal to enter by authorities. Wood ants are pretty common in these forests, and a colony of them happened to build a nest over the top of a vertical ventilation pipe
for the bunker. Over time, the pipe’s metal outlet covering rusted through, leaving a hole. This caused ants from the nest above to fall onto the bunker floor below, with no way of getting back up or out of the
bunker. But that didn’t stop the ants from doing
what they do best: nesting. A team of researchers were tipped off to the
presence of this nest and found a way into the bunker. Because what are a few trespassing laws when
there’s science to do? Once inside, the researchers could see these
ants were building and maintaining a nest, removing
dead ants, and depositing them in ant cemeteries far
from the nest to keep it clean and prevent any potential
disease from spreading. And all of this this is very normal ant behavior. But, the only ants they saw were workers – no queens, drones, or larvae. The constant rain of ants through the ventilation
pipe was the only thing sustaining the bunker’s
population. And there was evidence that these ants had
been at it for years, doing their ant thing under some pretty harsh
conditions. But what were they eating down there? Well typically wood ants feed not on wood, but on the waste produced by aphids as they
feed on tree sap. But there’s no aphids in an underground
bunker. When the researchers inspected the ants in
the cemeteries, it became clear they had been snacking on
each other. Which is not super surprising, given the lack
of other available options. Now typically, cannibalizing your friends
isn’t something social insects, like ant colonies,
do on the regular. However, wood ants are a known exception to
this rule. Every spring, when various forest colonies
are coming out of their winter dormancy period,
they engage in ant wars, killing each other en masse and then feasting
on the corpses. This establishes colony borders, and provides
food for the victors in the early days of spring
when food is scarce. Also, I want you to know that “ant wars”
is in fact the term used in the published literature. So, snacking on other wood ants is actually
normal! Eating members of the same colony is not that normal until they’re desperate. But, our bunker ants were just doing what
they had to do to survive. And they probably didn’t flinch too much
at this choice, considering they’re already predisposed
to the behavior. Now, in case you were worried, the researchers
didn’t just finish their research and bounce out of there, leaving the bunker ants to their own devices. Instead, they assembled a vertical boardwalk
out of a two by four, to connect the floor with the ventilation
pipe and give the bunker ants a way to reunite with
their original colony above. So hopefully, that put an end to it all, at
least for this particular bunker! Now a Cold War bunker full of ants is one
of the worst things I can imagine getting someone
for the holidays. Our merch site, dftba.com/scishow, has lots
of gifts that are both more portable and less prone
to biting. In particular, if you watched this episode
and feel in the mood for more incredibly specific animal behaviors, you might like our bucket hat with an orca
that’s wearing its own hat. But! If you want your purchase to arrive anywhere
within the US by December 24th with standard shipping, you need to order by December 8th, 2023. Now, if you're watching this video in a different
year, it's probably a different date. But if it's this year, then don't forget, December 8th, and don't forget to be awesome. [♪ OUTRO]|||thank you and the cheese and 
the mushrooms are just so good   super good highly recommend and it's huge 
you can easily share this with someone hey guys we're Kyle and Madie and we graduated 
college in December of 2021 after working hard   to pay off our student loans and save money 
we have started traveling the world full-time   there's just one thing we're attempting to 
do it on sixty dollars a day as a couple   while that may seem small we know that 
we can have an amazing time as well as   keep our costs at a minimum stick around 
to see how we adapt to full-time travel   and maneuver our tiny budget to have 
some experiences of a lifetime foreign super exciting because we're going 
to be eating a ton of yummy food   tonight we leave on an overnight train to Prague 
so we're gonna try to do a DIY food tour of Krakow thank you all right so we just stopped 
at our first place it's just a little   Bakery on the side of the street and 
we got a oh my God it's so fluffy oh yes all right all right oh yeah that is so good it's covered 
in glaze and it has a raspberry filling   on the inside it is so good I love it so much Maddie's right it's very good oh just yeah thank you I'm not even gonna try to butcher the 
name in Polish but this is what they would call   a Polish bagel um there's little carts all 
up and down the streets and they sell for   like two zlati 50 Cent maybe I guess I 
don't know how they would call it but give it a try it's okay it's a little chewy if 
I was really hungry I would get it   again but it's nothing nothing really crazy good it's almost like a less flavorful 
pretzel it really needs like a dip I think I was slightly harsh on it especially 
after eating a pooped beef but it's really not bad so our next stop I was looking for a 
Polish poppy seed cake but the place   that we went into they only sold like full 
loaves of it and we didn't want a full loaf   so I ended up getting a Polish I think 
Plum Danish so we'll see how that goes it's actually pretty good there's 
like full like there's like full   pieces of Plum in it there's a 
powdered sugar sweet that's good very good so good and the bread is so soft it's 
almost like punchki bread but like not glazed   all right now we're moving into the things that 
we're gonna eat for lunch so I think our first   item we're looking for is a zapi Khan does that be 
conka something like that I think it's the Polish   Pizza though okay so we stopped at this little 
market I guess you could call it we actually   saw this the other day walking by it there's 
just a bunch of food little restaurants stuck   in this little like octagon building I think 
and right now there's actually like a vintage   market going on which is super cool but our first 
thing we got is our zapikana this is pretty much   a Polish Pizza we got cheese mushrooms bacon and 
sweet chili sauce on it so super excited to try it that's super good it has like you 
can really taste or like bacon in   it but the sweet chili just gives it 
like a nice little like spice to it it's all just so good super good highly 
recommend and it's huge you can easily   share this with someone we found a Polish 
sausage in the same little square that we   were in and I've read a lot about whole sausages 
and how popular they are I guess we see them all   over so I had to try one they usually come 
with mustard but Maddie doesn't like mustard   so I ended up getting ketchup instead not 
really sure how you go about eating this he said I was shaking it's pretty good it tastes like sausage 
to me I would get it again it was so   this was 15 zlati and it's three 
dollars and sixteen cents America the sausage rolled onto the ground we're going back into Old Town Krakow and we're 
gonna finish up the food tour with some dinner   we're going back to the restaurant that we went 
to the other night just because they had a lot of   good options with authentic food and cheap prices 
all right so on our list is pierogies we actually   got them here like two nights ago all over here 
so we're not going to get those again but we love   this place super good and super authentic it's 
not like the absolute cheapest price place but   it's honestly super good we're really Frugal so 
if you do for it in here you know it's pretty good it's like overflowing all right this 
is a Polish dessert it's a soup and   it has kielbasa and potatoes in it 
it was 14 zlati which is 2.95 U.S foreign stuffed with mint it also comes with 
potatoes with dill on it it's so good   the dylana you would never guess 
it's super simple but let's try it it's gonna be good it also seems to have 
some rice in it and it's in like a sauce all right so this was 29 slotty which 
is like six dollars and eighteen cents   more expensive for something that we would buy but   it is so good it almost has the same feeling as my 
parokies had the other day here except now it has   some rice and some sauce that it's in it is it's 
soda and it's super Savory I really really like it this right here is a Polish potato 
pancake I can't really pronounce the   um polish version It's plaque with 
something but they look really good it tastes like a hash brown but there's something 
else and it makes it like creamier super good and   that's what I think this sour cream we paid it 
20 years for these so it's pretty cheap foreign foreign which is just over a dollar I think 
I'll put it up on the screen but we got   um chocolate it was just a little sign it's 
called Lassie I don't know if that's right   but um it had chocolate and like maybe like 
white chocolate in it not quite sure but foreign our food tour for the day is officially over 
and actually the craziest thing about it   is we are two zlati under budget today so 
between our apartment all the food we ate   our storage lockers that we had to put 
our bags in earlier and is that it yeah   all of that for sixty dollars for the day 
which is the craziest number 60 under right   that is so crazy it just kind of proves that like 
if you do want to go on the budget you can go out   and still do things and get really nice things 
just it doesn't always have to be expensive yeah   we ate a lot of food today and right it was we 
spent less than 29 US dollars right so we are   we have about three hours until our overnight bus 
leaves to Prague so we will see you then foreign|||Ukraine needs all the help it can get against
Russia. And there is one European country that has
stepped up in a big way. While major powers such as France, Germany,
and Britain have been hesitant to send military aid to Ukraine for various reasons, Poland
has almost single-handedly led the rally for Europe to support the war effort. Without Poland, things may have turned out
much differently after the first year of fighting in Ukraine, and Vladamir Putin might be looking
at victory rather than defeat. The Ukrainian people have shown the world
just how strong they are by repelling the initial invasion of their country and pushing
Russian forces out of much of their territory. However, Russia still has an advantage. This is not because Putin has the best equipment,
skilled soldiers, or brilliant tactics; it’s because the Russian military and population
are massive. Vladamir Putin will continue to hire mercenaries
and throw conscripts at Ukraine until he can wear them down. The good news for Ukraine is that its greatest
ally is right next door. Poland might be Ukraine's best hope of winning
the war. Recently, the Polish government has increased
military spending to strengthen its forces and has been Ukraine’s biggest advocate
since the war even began. Poland has sent over 1.7 billion dollars worth
of weapons and aid to Ukraine since Russia invaded. In fact, Poland is Ukraine’s second-largest
weapons provider after the United States. However, Ukraine’s neighbor has done much
more than just delivering tanks, guns, and ammunition. Poland has forced other nations in Europe
to send Ukraine help by leading by example. When certain countries needed to be convinced
that they should supply Ukraine with weapons it desperately needed, Poland was the one
who dragged them, kicking and screaming, to do the right thing. Ukraine needs Poland more than perhaps any
other ally. And as you’re about to find out, Poland
might be the only thing keeping Ukraine from succumbing to the seemingly endless onslaught
of Russian soldiers that are being sent to the front lines. First, let’s look at the direct impact Poland
has had on the war thus far. It’s important to remember that Poland has
had its fair share of disputes with Russia in the past. It wasn’t until the Soviet Union began to
collapse that Poland was able to hold its first free elections in 1990. Up until that point, the Polish people were
being oppressed by Moscow, which is something they have not been quick to forget. Poland is very aware that if Russia had been
successful in taking Ukraine at the beginning of the war, they could’ve been Putin’s
next target. This is why the Polish government was more
than willing to send tanks, weapons, and aid to Ukraine while simultaneously ramping up
its own military spending. The future of their nation depended on it. Now that Ukraine has successfully repelled
the initial invasion and is pushing Russia further and further out of its territory,
they need Poland more than ever. It’s estimated that Poland has sent around
3 billion dollars in both military and humanitarian aid to Ukraine. Close to 1.8 billion of that has been military
aid. In fact, per capita, Poland has exceeded the
amount of aid the United States has given to Ukraine. So, what types of weapons and vehicles has
Poland been sending? Well, if Poland can spare it, they’ve sent
it to Ukraine. It’s important to remember that Poland has
its own interests at heart and knows that the best way to defend its homeland at this
moment is by making sure Russia doesn’t succeed in taking Ukraine. When the war started, Poland sent Ukraine
over 200 T-72 tanks. These are Soviet Era vehicles, but the Ukrainian
military needed any tanks they could get their hands on. And as we’ve seen, they’ve made really
good use of them. There is little doubt that without the tanks
sent by Poland in the early days of the war, Ukraine would have had a much more difficult
time launching counteroffensives as the war progressed. Tanks are offensive vehicles, and every tank
that Poland has sent to their neighbor has been vital in pushing Russian forces back. Poland has supplemented the tanks they've
sent with dozens of BWP-1 infantry fighting vehicles and 122mm BM-21 Grad rocket launchers. On top of armored vehicles, Poland sent a
large amount of artillery to Ukraine, which would be utilized to defend key positions. The amount of artillery that has been used
in the war thus far is staggering. At the height of the conflict, Ukraine was
firing up to 4,000 artillery shells a day, while Russia is estimated to have fired close
to 60,000 shells daily. It’s no wonder why Poland had to send Ukraine
self-propelled artillery and large amounts of ammunition. Ukraine has also been in desperate need of
air defense. It’s been reported that Poland has sent
around 100 R-73 air-to-air missiles to help Ukrainian aircraft defend their territory. Another anti-air weapon that Poland has offered
to Ukraine is the 160 PPZR Pioruns, a portable air-defense system that is used to shoot down
low-flying planes, helicopters, and UAVs. Poland has also aided in Ukraine's reconnaissance
efforts by sending drones such as the WB Electronics FlyEyes to help scout areas and locate enemy
troops. On top of the vehicles, anti-air missiles,
and artillery, Poland has also delivered an unknown amount of guns, ammunition, and mortars
to Ukraine. Poland wants its neighbor to be able to defend
itself, and the Polish government is not afraid to continue sending money and any weapons
it can spare. But there’s also another vital role Poland
plays in Ukraine’s acquisition of weapons. The close proximity of Poland to the fighting
has allowed it to act as a staging ground for nations that wanted to send weapons and
vehicles to Ukraine. Much of the aid coming from across the world
is funneled into Poland and then transferred to the Ukrainian military. Poland is also important because it’s where
Ukrainian soldiers are being trained to use new weapons and vehicles that are being sent
by the West. Most recently, reports have been coming out
of Poland that Ukrainian troops are being trained on German Leopard II tanks as they
prepare to receive these vehicles in the coming weeks and months. It would be a disaster if the weapons reached
the front lines and were useless because Ukrainian soldiers didn’t know how to operate them. This is just another reason why Poland is
so vital to the Ukrainian war effort. They have taken it upon themselves to ensure
that when supplies and weapons reach the Ukrainian military, they will have the training to effectively
use the assets to decimate Russian forces. However, perhaps the most important reason
that Ukraine needs Poland in its fight against Russia is not because of what it is sending
but because of what it’s doing on the world stage. At the beginning of the war, NATO members
were hesitant to send too much aid to Ukraine out of fear that Russia might escalate things
as a result. As Ukraine continued to claim victories, the
west became a little less hesitant. Poland had advocated for European Powers and
the U.S. to send more military aid to Ukraine from day one. In fact, Ukraine was practically shouting
at the top of its lungs that a Russian invasion of Ukraine was imminent, and yet their warnings
seemed to fall on deaf ears. The reason Ukraine needs Poland is that they
have been their biggest advocate for a long time now. While other western countries dragged their
feet, Poland sent supplies, weapons, and humanitarian aid. Poland's vital role in the fight against Russia
never seems to end. Even as the war progressed, Poland showed
that it would continue to support Ukraine until Russian forces were pushed out of its
territory. Poland became a leader and set an example
for how other European countries should act. This gave nations on the continent the courage
to follow their example. When certain countries still refused to send
aid to Ukraine, Poland’s resolve led to those nations being guilted into providing
support that they should have sent a long time ago. Without Poland, there is a chance that the
aid being sent to Ukraine would still not be enough to adequately supply their troops. It was Polish leaders, in particular, who
convinced the German government to send modern tanks like the Leopard II to Ukraine. Germany was hesitant to commit their tanks
to the war effort for far too long. This was for several different reasons, but
needless to say, it was Poland and its actions that helped convince Germany to finally do
what was right. Even if Germany had gone the other way with
their decision, Poland threatened to send dozens of their own Leopard IIs in defiance. Along with motivating other countries to send
more military aid to Ukraine, Poland has also been advocating for tougher sanctions on Russia
to try and slow its wartime production. The less money Russia has coming in, the better. If Russia doesn’t have the funds to pay
for its mercenaries, factories, and military, it will have a much more difficult time launching
an offensive or holding back Ukrainian forces in the coming months. Without the leadership of Poland throughout
the war, Ukraine would be in a more precarious position. Poland has become a powerful voice in the
conflict and a main advocate for Ukraine even as Germany and other western powers drag their
feet on sending aid and tightening sanctions. But this is nothing new. Ever since 2004, when Poland joined the European
Union, it warned of the growing threat being posed by Putin’s Russia. The fact of the matter is, Poland has seen
it all before. They have dealt with the brutality of a Russian
tyrant ruling their country. Yet, these warnings were willfully ignored,
and now Ukraine is paying dearly for it. Currently, Poland is one of the countries
leading the charge to send F-16 fighter jets to Ukraine to help defend against Russian
aircraft. At the end of January, Poland even said they
were willing to give the Ukrainian military their F-16s just to provide them with more
aerial support. However, until NATO agrees to transfer F-16s
to Ukraine, Poland cannot legally provide them with the aircraft they desperately need. Even though the jets are currently being held
back, it seems that Poland will continue to advocate and fight for sending the weapons
and vehicles Ukraine requires to win the war. But besides being Ukraine's biggest ally when
it comes to gathering support, Poland is also doing some other miraculous things to aid
the Ukrainian people in their time of need. Poland has accepted more refugees into their
borders than any other European country. It’s estimated that there may be as many
as 3.5 million Ukrainian refugees in Poland. At the very least, we know there are over
1.5 million registered refugees at this point in time. Poland has been leading humanitarian efforts
to assist the people of Ukraine just like it has led the charge to send more military
aid. The refugees in Poland are provided with healthcare,
education, and possible employment, which is amazing when you consider how much money
and resources Poland has also sent to the front lines. Without Poland, the Ukrainian people would
be suffering even more than they already are. To be fair, Poland is one of the strongest,
wealthiest, and closest countries to Ukraine’s borders, but they have also gone above and
beyond to help the Ukrainian people when it seems like certain nations around the world
are doing the bare minimum. And the truth is, as much as Ukraine needs
Poland, the rest of Europe needs them as well. Since Poland joined NATO in 1999, it has become
a key component in the defense of Europe’s eastern borders. Its strategic location is one of the main
reasons it’s not only able to aid Ukraine but protect the rest of Europe from Russian
aggression if things get that far. The nation has also enjoyed massive economic
growth, allowing Poland to expand its military while improving the lives of its citizens. Without Poland's military and economic growth,
Europe would have a lot more to worry about on its eastern front. Obviously, Poland isn’t the only deterrent
against Russia invading the rest of Europe. The United States' military strength and the
number of nukes NATO has overall also plays a role in keeping Russia, or any aggressor
for that matter, from invading a nation that is part of the NATO alliance. So, although Poland plays a pivotal role in
the protection of Europe, it’s by no means the only defense Europe has against an invasion
from the east. Since Russia invaded Ukraine, Poland has enacted
plans to increase its military spending to around 3% of its GDP. This means that Poland will be better equipped
to protect itself, but it will also be better equipped to aid its NATO allies. And while its military is both vitally important
for supporting Ukraine and the rest of Europe, its politics are just as important for the
future. It’s alarming how close some European politicians
have become with Moscow. Leaders in both France and Germany have entered
into trade deals, pipeline agreements, and negotiated incentives with the brutal dictator
of Russia in the past. Sometimes this was done out of necessity,
but other times agreements between European politicians and Russina businessmen were done
solely for lucrative purposes. No one wants to admit that they’ve made
deals with Vladamir Putin, yet this may explain why certain governments have been so slow
to provide aid to Ukraine and increase sanctions on Russia. Poland, on the other hand, has been outspoken
about their disdain for the Russian government and the dangers of entering into agreements
with Putin from day one. Some of the West listened to these warnings;
some didn’t. But it’s no surprise that when peace talks
commenced after the 2014 invasion of Crimea and Eastern Ukraine by Russia, Putin picked
Germany and France to participate in the negotiation process. It’s interesting to note that this resulted
in the failed Minsk Agreements that obviously did nothing to stop the full-scale invasion
of Ukraine by Russia in February of 2022. Ukraine and Poland both know what it was like
being under the rule of Moscow during the Soviet Era. Although it's been over 30 years since the
collapse of the Soviet Union, people who suffered under the Soviet regime are still around to
advocate against a Russian led eastern Europe. This dark time is still ingrained in the collective
consciousness of the Polish and Ukrainian people, and if nothing else, Putin’s decision
to invade Ukraine has brought these two nations closer together. Poland and Ukraine have had their disagreements
in the past, but it has become clear since the invasion that Poland is willing to do
as much as it possibly can to help Ukraine maintain its sovereignty. However, Poland’s hands are tied in some
aspects of what it can do because of its membership in NATO. If they weren’t bound by NATO doctrine,
Poland might have gone much further to stop the Russian onslaught happening to their neighbor. For now, all Poland can do is continue to
take in millions of refugees, send as much aid as possible, and be a persistent advocate
for Ukraine. As the saying goes, the enemy of my enemy
is my friend. And Russia is everyone’s enemy right now. Recent polls have shown that the Ukrainian
government thought of Poland as their closest partner even before the war. Now that Russia has invaded and Poland seems
to be one of the main voices fighting to send support to Ukraine, the nation will likely
view Poland as its closest partner in the years to come. Without Poland, there is a very real possibility
that Russia would be in a better position than it is right now. The Ukrainian military and people are definitely
the heroes in this conflict, but without the support of Poland and the numerous roles it’s
playing in the conflict, it’s unclear if Ukraine could have kept Russian forces from
overwhelming them. The weapons and aid that Poland has provided
have been incredibly important to the war effort. However, its advocacy for Ukraine and the
leadership role it assumed in European politics may be even more vital. It seems clear that as long as Russia continues
to wage war, Poland will continue to support Ukraine in any way it can. And even after this conflict is over,it’s
almost a guarantee that Poland will continue to play a pivotal role in NATO’s defensive
plans. Poland’s economy and military strength have
made the nation one of the most influential in Europe, and without them, Ukraine would
likely not be able to win the war against Russia. Now watch “Why Poland is Preparing for Full
Scale War Against Russia.” Or check out “Countries That Will Be Destroyed
Because of World War 3.”|||[Music] today we're headed for Far East Poland the city of Bo is stuck according to legend the origins of the city date back to a Lithuanian Duke who decided to build a hunting manor which gradually evolved into a village known as the white hillside as a pinnacle point on the trading route between the Baltic and the Black Sea ballistic became a melting pot of both cultures and religions accordingly the town has many amazing monuments unique in Poli this statue depicts the Blessed Saint Ezra Papa Bush girl who comes from a village not far from here his legacy was vital in creating the Poland that we know today by fighting communism his murder occurred in 1984 yet his spirit and legacy live on strongly [Music] the gate behind me is particularly special because it was designed by King Augustus the strong making it one of Poland's most unique clock towers additionally thanks to brilliant engineering of a Swiss blacksmith the clock on its tower is the oldest functioning clock of its type in Poland in 1728 the famous king augustus fell ill probably of diabetes this is when brunette Sookie invited the king to his palace offering the help of his doctors the king suffered a toe amputation with a recovery period facing him to stay in the city for a long time known for his love of architecture he would often sketch building designs to pass the time and during this recovery period is when the king drafted his sketch of the great gate Grif one of my favorite attractions is a 16th century Palace that has changed ownership hands a few times throughout the course of its rich history today it is a medical university and gorgeous place for tourists to visit [Music] [Applause] [Music] many famous figures would come here to enjoy the beautiful gardens there were also outdoor theatre performances which occasionally included Italian actresses as guest stars [Music] [Applause] this plus it's from 18th century but the old story starts in 17th century pass brunette ski because it was owned by Ian Clemens Brian's one of the most wealthiest man in Poland in 18th century he got political ambition he want to became a king and he must have beautiful pass to make everybody see that he is mighty - he is powerful that he is good owner of all his lands he could be a good manager he will be good king for Poland [Music] this exhibition portrays in 19th and 20th century pharmacy but what makes it special is that it has an exhibition actual artifacts used by podlaski pharmacists local medicine [Music] this exhibition is certainly one of a kind it is devoted to the technologies of eye care existing in the 70s and 80s this machine in particular is interesting because it is meant to suck metallic parts out of the I said to be a horrific painful process and often double damages the eye that's already incurred Trump [Music] it's almost incomprehensible that such a regal space accommodates the average medical student here in this city I cannot say that my university looked like this I regret that it didn't and so with that let's move on as I said before the always stock is known as a city of many cultures and religions among the residents there are Catholics Protestants Jews Muslims and members of the Orthodox Church the church known as the Church of the Holy Spirit is the biggest Orthodox Church in the country built in 1999 to meet the needs of the local growing Orthodox community outside the church is a monument to the Orthodox victims of World War two circuit design efficient ago doha beyond stock oh yes Navy entra para vos Valentino Paulson estrogen Tina change' Cobras China stoma extrusion budova Vala jerk in Troodon Sivaji not Oh Ezra dragula shrewd co-financed over Africa Russia material of budova Lani Moo dah dah dah dah dah speed our gym vicar Astana to tie potentiel not even a contingent Vipassana esparto begotten lasagna econ frisky monsters sketchy key to VG me scent of the saga vota national artists to subsystem Pahlavi the Pratt's vestroia patient in Crystal Cove Alice vehicle boy a universe for especially that nourishing steak Amira's marami Argentinian [Music] umbrella stock is a perfect restaurant for meat lovers specialized in locally sourced meat literally the meat is prepared in the butcher shop next door I'm excited to check this one [Music] this is my first ever ribeye steak in Poland and 300 grams I should leave here completely full I can tell you that the smell of this is overwhelmingly appetizing I won't lie I'm starving at the moment so maybe I'm biased but steak is not something I eat often we've never had it on undiscovered and I'm ready to give this a try [Music] okay so my initial take aways here certainly mean it's not Patti and you know that there's a high quality meet because it's extremely chewy it means that the animal had a life beyond just a small steel cage I think that this is a unique experience altogether and sadly I believe most people will never taste such quality meat as this so much quality in fact that it does not need much seasoning at all the meat is the flavor with an addition of the specific grilled taste and a little bit of salt I feel honored to have the opportunity to eat this [Music] it's time to learn about a local hero a legend if you will story goes this beast of an animal prevented a nasty robbery from taking place and one thing is for sure this dog is very popular with the children the owner of a jewelry shop usually took a break around noon leaving his dog as a guard one day a thief came to steal his products murdering his dog in the process all of this commotion woke a nearby puppy who started barking at the thief grabbing the attention of the owner and the neighbors the alarmed community promptly overpowered the criminal giving credit to the brave puppy one of the clients was so moved by this story that he wanted to fund this Monument it is said that only those of a pure heart may put their hand inside of the dog's mouth with no consequence if the wicked put their hand inside of this monument the dog will come to life and bite their hand off [Music] and finally we visit the town's crown jewel the center of Philharmonic's and opera [Music] the room from this perspective is daunting I can't imagine how the performers must feel before they put on their spectacular show anyone with a rock star dream would certainly enjoy standing where I am at the moment [Music] being here in this building around this building in this Opera House we feel like in a heart of Polish region and we feel this working here and we feel that many tourists who are coming to be away stock feel the same coming here and feel this free space of art which is putted in the heart of green center of the away stock [Music] and we are playing music as we are playing operas we are playing concerts of course we are playing pieces for children right now and sometimes we are playing ballet which are coming to us from Russian for instance from Belarus because we are very close to Belarus border so it's also special of this place [Music] [Applause] [Music] [Music] [Music] the always stuck truly lives up to its reputation as a city of many cultures and religions presenting a very specific kind of beauty certainly worthy of your attention so until you come here enjoy it for yourself I'm Ryan so kesh Poland [Music] [Music] [Music]|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||- Boom! (foreign language) What's up people? Ola, Vigo's dad here. Welcome to another episode. Guys today, we're gonna
do a reaction video. We're gonna react to an
Animated History of Poland. I remember that I saw this
film like around a year, a year and a half ago, and
I liked it quite a lot. I remember that was quite touching. The graphics were astounding. I read somewhere that it
was created by the same team that developed The Witcher game. What we saw there The Witcher
on Netflix was fantastic. We're waiting for another season. I have not seen the
original one in Polish, but I promise you that I
will come around to it. What I did do for this reaction video is that I kinda like
prepared a little bit. I don't know if you're gonna
call this cheating or not, I hope you can bear with me. But I went and researched
some of the dates that are shown the video. The video has in the bottom
left corner some dates of the events that are happening or that they are recreating there. And I am not so well
versed in Polish history and I know that a lot of my
subscribers are not Polish. So I want to mention some of
the things that are happening, just so that, you know, myself and the people that
don't know these events can have an idea of what they're
seeing here on the screen. So without further ado, let's react to an animated
history of Poland. And let's begin. (orchestral music) An animated history of Poland. And the graphics just hit you immediately. This the year, 800, 900. This is like the middle ages. Right like early middle ages. (gentle music) Was I gonna have my cheat
cheat here reading some of the stuff. This marks the beginning
of the culture distinction between Western and Eastern Europe Got the map. Polska, Panstwo, Vwohe So we have a Church in 1966, Okay they're turning down
some pagan gods here. So this is Christianization of Poland. I think this is, (foreign language) The a introduction of
Christianity in Poland. Here we have the, I'm reading, Mieszko I, the King. (groaning) Year 1000, battles were so brutal. Those battles back then. Year 1200. (light airy music) Which is this? What's happening here? This is a Golden Bull of Rimini. Okay, this is the Golden Bull of Rimini. It's a decree by Emperor
Frederick II in Rimini. He'd granted and confirmed the privilege of territorial conquest. Conquest and conquest. Humans are always trying
to conquest things. (light airy music) And then devastation. Year between the-- This is the 14th century. Year 1333 this is, ah! This is Casimir III the Great, right? He says that he inherited
a kingdom that was weakened and then he made it
prosperous and wealthy. (triumphant music) This is 1364. The Congress of Kraków This was a meeting of
monarchs that were trying to propose an anti-Turkish crusade. I can see this here. look at the graphics. Let's just appreciate the graphics. This is fantastic, it really
does look like a video game. (orchestral music) Oh, again that's the Kraków square, right? I could see the church there. That's of course some development and you can see agriculture,
returns into houses. Oh, this guy I remember,
what was his name? Władysław II he's Grand Duke of Lithuania. He turned Lithuania into
Christianity, he converted it. And also he says here
that he laid a foundation for the centuries long
Polish Lithuanian union, which was very strong. The Battle of Grunwald,
here with Władysław. This is Gada Ince I think,
I think that was Gada Ince. I've never been there. Oh look the, Jewish church. That's 16th century. Oh wonderful this is Nicolaus Copernicus. He proposed a new model
of the universe where, the sun was the center of
the universe not the earth. I'm sure he got a lot of shot of for that, but in Poland, if you guys are Polish you should be very proud to
have someone like Copernicus. He changed the world. So here we have the year 1619. What happened here? This is just early modern ages. This is the Polish-Lithuanian state, became very influential in Europe. 1883, the battles with
Vienna, interesting. This is a battle of Vienna
took place it in Kahlenberg. We've been to Kahlenberg yah. I think they have a Polish
church actually at the top of that mountain Kahlenberg. This is the 17th century
Apollinaris, of course Apollinaris. It goes pretty fast. Oh guys, hold on, who is this guy? Can you please tell me who is this guy? And why is he throwing coins at people? You can see it on this scene
here, right on the comments. I don't know, I was trying to
research, I cannot find it. 1772, this is the Partitions of Poland. This is the beginning
of the 123 years where the Poland literally
disappear from the map. The first constitution of Poland, also was the first constitution in Europe, and I think the second in the world, only second to the American one. This is the 18th century. So this is the 1797, 1830, that's a big jump there, that is Poland. So brutal, 18--. This is I guess called the organic work, praca organiczna era, right? Poland I believe was a
booming here during this time in the sense of culture and
arts and industrial revolution. Oh, this is a fantastic scene, I love this 1918, This is The Second Polish Republic This is when Poland finally
came back as a state in all the, remember that I discussed
this on a past video Polish people who owned the
underground Polish state. This modern times, 1922,
I guess after the war, Kino Polonia. See the artists work. You see Hitlera, I saw a Hitler
and of course here it comes Marks the beginning of
the second world war when Hitler invaded war, in Poland. I remember reading that the Polish pilots were instrumental in Poland helping win, I don't remember if it
was the first world war or the second, please correct me on that. Oswiencim, this is as
Auschwitz, its terrible, we've been there two times,
it is something very grim. You can feel the terrible vibe in there. Yeah, I think it was second
world war where the pilots, the Polish pilots were
like a deciding factor in the allies winning the war. Here's 1944, Hitler loses the war. Such a terrible time for Poland. And then of course the allies
abandoned Polish people and basically the Russians come and we just have mistake. People think that Poland
was a communistic, they were never a communistic state like Romania was and Ukraine, but yeah. Solidarnosc movement in
Gdansk they paved the way for the first elections Joachim Gauck won and became the first president of Poland after, you know, many many years being kind of
like under the boot of of the USSR. Once again, not communistic country, but-- and then of course development. I remember when I went to Poland for the first time, what
also surprised me a lot, the level of development,
education of the people. Yeah, of course there are traces of, we call it traces of communism, but you know what I mean? And I think that's the
end of the video, right? Thank you. So yeah, I remember
that I was so surprised when I went to poland at the beginning. I first spoke about this before, and just to imagine then, you know, 50 years prior to that
moment, I went in 2012. You guys literally had
a destroyed country. So yeah, mad respect. I think Polish people have gone through so many things
and still to be able to have the country that you
have, developing every day. I know things are difficult at the moment and there they are all over the world. And I know many of you, you
express it on my comments. I get it. It's not easy, but you
have a lot to be proud of. And that this animation was fantastic. I really, really enjoyed it. I know that it has some criticism. It left out some major
players, especially women, Polish women that changed
the course of history. The one thing is that I feel that the events went
a little bit too fast. So if you're not Polish,
it takes you a while. Hence why I prepare some a little document here to guide myself. But anyhow I hope you guys enjoyed it too. Boom. That's all guys. That's the end of the episode. I hope you liked it. If you did, please give us a thumbs up. Share this video with a
friend or a family member. I know based on my analytics that like 70% of you guys watching are not
subscribed to the channel. Why is that? Why are you doing that? Come on subscribe, please for me. It will be an honor to have you as a subscriber. Anyway, see you guys next week. Bye-bye.|||Do you know what day it is today? January 13? And what is the day of the week? Friday? Friday. Friday the 13th. I don't know how it is in your country, but in Poland Friday the 13th is a day when we don't do anything important. Friday the 13th is an unlucky day. Anyway, this is not a typical Polish belief, because already in antiquity it was believed that it is an imperfect day. An unlucky day. While 12 was considered the perfect number, 13 as the first number following the perfect perfect twelve was the imperfect, unlucky number. I hope that doesn't mean this video won't work for me. If you don't know me yet, my name is Ania, I'm a teacher of Polish as a foreign language, and this is Płynnie po polsku, a channel and podcast for people who learn Polish. Remember that if you feel the need, you can turn on subtitles for this video. And don't forget that if you join my Patreon, you'll get extra exercises and vocabulary lists for this video, and access to other exclusive content. Link to Patreon, as always, I put in the description of the video at the bottom. And we are starting today's video about Polish superstitions. But before we start talking about superstitions in Poland, it is worth explaining something about the Polish vocabulary. In Polish we have two words: superstition and superstition. In everyday language, we use these words interchangeably and honestly, we don't see what the difference is. We can say Friday the 13th is superstition or Friday the 13th is superstition. That is, something that we believe without reason, which has no basis, no explanation. We believe it will bring bad luck. But if we want to be precise in Polish, it is worth remembering that these words are not quite the same. Superstition is simply the belief, often unfounded, that some particular thing or some particular event will somehow change the situation. In turn, superstition is actually remnants of old beliefs. Therefore, superstitions are more associated with worship, with divination. I said Friday the 13th, but as you can probably guess, this is not the only superstition we have in Poland. Staying on the subject of bad luck, perhaps the most popular superstition after Friday the 13th is the black cat. If a black cat crosses your path just as you are on the road, you will be unlucky. This is not a typical Polish belief, a typical Polish superstition, because already in the Middle Ages in Europe it was believed that cats - black cats are helpers of witches. And another thing that brings bad luck is walking under a ladder. Luckily, it doesn't seem to happen that often. When the ladder is unfolded, it forms a triangle, which is a perfect geometric figure. And going through it causes us to disturb the harmony of this figure. Therefore, it can bring us bad luck. And the worst thing is breaking a mirror. If you break a mirror, you will have seven years of bad luck. And this is also a superstition that comes from ancient times, because then it was believed that the cycle of human existence is divided into seven years. And breaking the mirror disrupts this cycle, so seven years of bad luck await us. In Poland, we also cannot open an umbrella indoors. And this also comes from the times when it was believed that the sun was a deity, and when we open an umbrella indoors, we offend the deity. In Poland, a lot of superstitions also apply to marriage, including, above all, finding a husband. A woman in Poland cannot sit on the corner of the table, because it is believed that if she sits on the corner of the table, she will become an old maid, i.e. she will never get married. A lot of superstitions are also associated in Poland with the very organization and planning of a wedding. So remember, for example, that if you are organizing a wedding in Poland, do not organize it in a month in which there is no letter "r". Because it will bring you bad luck. You have to get married in such months that have the letter "r" in them, August, June, September, October. It will bring you luck. And if you're marrying a foreigner, unfortunately, superstition doesn't explain which language is right here. In Poland, we also do not put the handbag on the ground. If you put your purse on the ground, it means you won't have any money, because money that is close to the ground runs away faster. This means you'll spend them faster. And if you happen to say something that you don't want to happen, don't forget to knock on unpainted wood right after. It will make you kind of take back what you said. We can treat it as a preventive, preventive action. When you meet Poles, you will surely notice that they will not want to greet you on the threshold of the house, on the threshold of the apartment. They'll probably let you in first, and then greet you. In Poland, it is believed that greeting across the threshold is also bad luck. Apparently, it was once believed that in this way evil powers from the outside were let inside. And be sure to always be careful with salt. Because if you spill salt, you're going to argue with someone. Of course, these are not all the superstitions that exist in Poland, we have a lot of them in Poland, and what's interesting, even though we don't believe in them theoretically, we try to do everything so as not to tempt fate. Be sure to let me know if there are any superstitions like this in your country, or if they are the same or different. And what do you think about superstitions, do you believe in them, do you actually try to avoid these things, or do you rather do things as you please and don't care about superstitions. And even though today is Friday the 13th, I hope it doesn't bring me bad luck on YouTube To prevent this and help me, you can like this video, subscribe to this channel if you haven't already , go to my Patreon and have a look to other social media I am on, such as Instagram or Facebook. Thank you so much for watching this video and see you in the next one. Bye Bye!|||Kajima Poland would like to thank Project Management and Alstal Konstrucje for nomination for #GaszynChallenge. We dedicate our participation to Kubuś from Hajnówka. From the expansion of Designer Outlet Warszawa, which we run as a general contractor, we nominate the following companies: 7R, P3 and Prologis. And now we're doing push-ups for Kuba. one, two, three ... ten Bravo!  |||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||what's going on everybody this island hopper tv 
coming to you from warsaw poland today we're going   to do a tour around this city we're going to go 
to the old town and then the new city and we're   going to check out everything in between have 
some beer have some food get a haircut let's go   what in the world is going on 
everybody this is the island hopper tv   coming to you from borsa we're in 
poland the capital with a population of   3.2 million in the metro area 1.7 million in 
the city itself you can hear we are going in   the direction of the sound we are right 
outside the royal castle here and we are   entering into the old town of warsaw much of 
this actually 90 percent of old town warsaw   was destroyed in world war ii 
city that went through a lot   between the russians and the germans 
fighting over the city it has a tough   gritty personality to it survived a lot really 
the russians tried to fortify it in the late   1800s the germans tried to take it in the 1930s 
1940s and today it is the capital of poland let's see if i got a little bit of some 
coinage for this man here [Music] we go [Music]   it's a working man [Music]   so we are coming into the old 
town now these pigeons whoa hmm interesting so in this travel guide we're gonna show you 
guys around the old town some of the new town   as i was arriving in from lithuania oh 
vilnius oh he's got a snake holy moly   people are freaking out because there was 
a big snake like a boa here's the cathedral you guys have requested that i skipped 
cathedrals because you get bored   with cathedrals so i don't 
typically stop at those anymore if you want me to stop at him you have 
to let me know in the comments but   we're gonna go get some drinks [Music] 
negroni check out some of these below ground restaurants what is this another   cathedral at least show you the outside 
that is quite impressive though [Music] these girls are doing great beautiful voices right so we're actually coming 
into the town square here oh what do we got going on here 
gotta get around the old uh   hard workers the people working 
hard keeping this city clean it's a tough job no matter where you live man the 
trash man tip of the cap especially with with as   much consumption goes on in the world today with 
plastics and other trash it's just insane how much   consumption goes on actually let's 
walk right into the city square here oh pigeons so they've rebuilt some of this i went 
into that museum the museum of warsaw but uh there's many of these squares 
across europe actually oh [Music] let me take you down here 
real quick you can go underground oh it's a restaurant i think we got here whoa historical okay this is 
right here in the old town [Music] oh man he's putting on a real show huh [Music] [Music] what do you guys say we go in and get a 
drink here at one of these pubs and bars   i'm looking for a negroni let's see here it's an italian drink i either drink that a beer or a moscow mule i 
like moscow mills but i did have that latvian   lemonade in riga my goodness it was great but on a 
hot day like that oh man the ice cream does sound   good ice cold beer too craft beer pizza burger 
look at those drinks i'm gonna try something here sam fousey upstairs and the 
downstairs let's go upstairs hello well i will say a negroni will put hair 
on your chest it's that kind of drink   all right we are back out onto the street here 
feeling good feeling good oh man what is this   what do they have here vintage unique antiques oh my goodness look at the good thing 
i should buy something here oh wow oh my gosh legit old coins those 
are copper but those are silver which one should i get fine just a small small coin from   before the war let's do it but this is much 
more expensive than this because it's very rare   oh is it how much is one of those the smallest 
coin is here it's 1 800 but these are about 60   69's what and this must be 200. because it's rare 
the coin can be small and can be very expensive for example this one is 189 
and this much more expensive   400 you see they are from the time before the 
the war war and these are after the war i want   the one before the war before the war yes i will 
take i will take this small one here yeah this is   very nice kind very good which one is it what's 
300 euro yeah and it why is it how old is it five silver is what is it it's real silver and old this is 1936 1936. yeah this is a really 
interesting kind this is typical corrector kind   of that you don't have it in on the market so 
many of these are from the communist town these   are the communists yeah this is here are 
polish coins from that time before the war   yeah and here if you were to buy any coin 
out of here which one would you go for   not a collector okay i prefer to sell it yeah 
but in this moment what's good for a collector okay i get this i get this 
one we start with this one i'll think about that one maybe another 
peyronie and i'll come back and get it   this is really nice kind but how much is this 
which this this one this is i told you 300 euro oh   300 euros yeah and this is i like the price range 
of 50 euro this is about 100 euro this is a 50.   okay we just stick with this one this 
is nice price coins from the middle ages   but very popular but a very good coin silver coin 
from how much in the area it's a 500 years old   it's a 20 euro okay let's do that one too both 
of those okay and we're done thank you sir   so if you guys want to come here it's right 
next to the warsaw barbicon and you could see   this is the name lapidarium house of magic 
okay so now we will go through the warsaw barbarian remember there was fortresses that were 
built here by the russians in the late 1800s get like fortifications and that uh negroni really hit 
the spot puts you in a good mood yeah i ended up getting three coins from 
there and an amber bracelet one was on   one was a russian coin from before the 
war like in the 1800s and another one was or the other two were polish coins i'll probably 
try and show you guys later i also want to show   you guys the hotel that i'm staying at at 
the westin so here's my room in warsaw this   is the west end under a hundred dollars i got 
because i'm a member of the marriott bon voy   so this was a 95 room night for under 
200 i got two nights here uh compared   to what i've been paying in scandinavia 
that was uh one night at a basic hotel   so definitely the further south you go and 
east the better the prices get in europe also   being a member of marriott bon voy does have its 
benefits as you can see okay i shall tell right that was when i first checked in pays to 
have that marriott bon boy yeah i could   stay a hotel down in the city center although 
i don't even actually see very many down here   here's another cathedral i might have to just go 
into some of these cathedrals at some point and   put them out towards the end the 
middle or the latter part of the   video just if i put them in the middle 
i've noticed my engagements also drop   off like people are just like yeah 
yeah they like fast forward to video i'm actually getting hungry obviously 
they got polish dogs probably right   or is that a guess guatemala coffee you guys 
see our guatemala series we went to lake atitlan   and made a video of the capital of guatemala 
city but that is where the coffee is sourced from so i'm going to keep 
cruising through the old town here   see what else we can uncover about warsaw a lot 
of people are telling me to go down to krakow   or warcraw which is a hard one pronounced 
it's uh actually more towards germany we've got a few places in poland poland's 
definitely underrated i mean if you were to   ask me about germany versus poland i might take 
poland as a tourist destination now to germany i   like germany don't get me wrong germany's got 
some cool stuff but poland's just that good   if you go to germany you might as well do poland 
if you go to poland you might as well do germany   you know it's one of those kind of situations i'm ultimately trying to get to 
one of my favorite cities ever   frog everyone keeps saying krakow is uh the 
best in poland that's what i keep hearing wow what a beautiful city huh i'm gonna 
go in here and get some food it looks like   let's see what they got it's 
time for another pit stop that is what i ended up getting oh this is a russian one they 
say it's silver and some amber i got a local lager this is the uh that's the name i think let's try it well 
this is my soup it's got egg mushroom sausage yeah let's do it the other soup is delicious super delicious all right we have made it to the 
fountains look at this view up here right down   there is the beautiful river so the river is the 
vestula river and that is the multimedia fountains   let's go down there man that soup was so good 
seriously i think polish soup is delicious   it kind of burns your mouth a little bit when 
it's too hot and on a hot day like this you can   see people just kind of gathering around 
this multimedia fountain for good reason so we're gonna head around to the rest of 
the city of warsaw show you some other areas   uh like the new town and some other places 
actually uh check the time stamps below   so as i walk up into the old town center 
you can see some nice architecture and some of the old homes at 
least the styles that were rebuilt   i don't think those are original homes but 
they are rebuilt of how the homes and people   were living you can see many different units 
kind of side by side right here in the old town   let's go back up there though as we go 
through the fort here the old fortress getting another look here 
at the old village fortress fortification i actually want to go back in here 
to see if it uh picks up vibes now that it's   actually four o'clock in the afternoon almost 
just generally good vibes people are smiling   friendly laid back not pressuring you for anything 
and just a good experience i would definitely   recommend when you come down here trying a beer 
and then walking around especially you know if   your first time here because if it's your first 
time you need that little icebreaker to put you   in a good mood and kind of settle you down because 
what i've noticed is when you go to these like   new places where they're very crowded 
sometimes it's easy to get kind of anxious   but that beer that wine that cocktail or 
whatever you like just kind of takes the   edge off that's why i recommend that and 
for me it works every time like a charm now if you're going to a museum on the 
outskirts of town you might not need that   but when you're walking around an old town 
or a new city for the first time something   to take that little edge off really works wow as 
i was walking by this place it's called strolaski look at all that food right there 
i saw that and i was like dude   i need to do something like 
that is that a schnitzel freaking awesome great place right there 
i would if i didn't just eat and i was   not going to these museums over here 
i would definitely stop there and have   probably the schnitzel or the cabbage 
and chicken i don't know i love it i would definitely come back to 
poland based on my experience so far   everything about it is fantastic look 
at these pigeons oh those pigeons are look at that beautiful pigeons   and lovely lady of course you can't mention 
the pigeons without mentioning the lovely women   because they're everywhere in poland polish 
women are awesome they're so friendly   like every polish girl i've talked to is 
just so friendly look at this guy rocking out   okay so we've made it back into the place where 
we began it's kind of picked up vibes definitely   good to have the music obviously the sprinkler 
going now we're going to kind of head this way   which is in the opposite direction of where 
we've just uh been so far i'm just hanging   out chilling as you know i travel solo so my 
experience is a solo cruiser totally chill i think that's where the polar soccer team plays   i don't know that arena or 
that stadium there it's huge huge old stadium i think i'm 
gonna go to krakow tomorrow and then hopefully on to czech and then slovakia 
two different countries chechia czech republic   and slovakia and then i'm actually aiming for 
bucharest hungary so i got a lot of work ahead   of me a lot of work to do but at some point 
i want to take a day to just unwind or two   i usually take a day at a time honestly so 
as we come up into a different area of town glad i'm staying hydrated out here look at this 
guy what's he doing already donated to the horses it was like a horse charity i donated to it's 
fun instead of all the things to save nope old church there oh that's a 
good look downtown the old town okay so yeah we're definitely coming up 
on a different area of town here [Music]   stopped to get breakfast at one of those cafes 
like that you got a lemonade and an egg sandwich especially if you know you're gonna be 
drinking a little bit of bread here and there   helps with your digestion for that at least so far 
as i can tell or i've been told i'm not a doctor   so please do your own research okay [Music] where's everybody tuning in from the day [Music] see when processing through a crowd like that the beer helps for sure like and it's 
probably more than one you probably want to because when the crowd starts fleeing towards you 
what is this pomegranate yummy yummy that's like a   dessert almost well i should go there it's too 
busy though it's too crowded for a guy like me   if i was with my girlfriend or something my 
wife or friend i might stop in and try that   yummy yummy yeah we're just kind of cruising this 
road it's actually to the east of the old town i think it's called zamkowi i 
think that's what it's called   if i'm wrong someone in the 
comments please correct me this road here i haven't seen a single car 
but no one's walking on it just riding bikes yeah warsaw very good very good you guys are always asking me if i'm going to 
get a stabilizer i'm actually using a stabilizer   i just move too fast i guess 
i have too much bob in my foot probably if i slow down a little 
bit might eliminate some of that bob thanks to everyone who likes 
these videos that definitely helps   get the video out to a larger audience and support this channel   and also thanks to all the new subscribers we 
get around 200 to 300 new subscribers every day so i appreciate all you subscribers and even those 
who turn on the bell i'm also going to be putting   a website newsletter out there so check 
out the website sign up for the newsletter   maybe once a week or once a month or once 
every two weeks i don't know the exact   rotation it just depends but i'll try to send 
out a newsletter because youtube sometimes   even when you subscribe even when you turn 
on the bell doesn't send out notifications so   getting you guys on that newsletter is going 
to be really good [Music] i don't know if   you can hear those gold coins in my pocket or 
silver coins i should say or silver not gold kind of wish they would stop jingle jangling but when i get on my backpack my other channel 
vertcam i actually posted a post over there   or i posted a link to tell people from this 
channel to go there and like 50 of you came   over and subscribed to vertcam which helps that 
channel also and in there i just i show you the   the less than desirable side of travel 
which is the transit situation like buses airports riding ferry boats probably gonna do 
some museum reviews and hotel reviews on that   channel also and it's really nice how's it going 
what's up yeah it is really nice thank you yeah   so we're just cruising he said it's a nice 
little camera this is actually a dji osmo camera two the dji osmo 2 pocket because 
i get a lot of those questions too also on some of the other 
videos you guys are asking about   public transportation you can see 
they've got buses we've also ridden trams   look at that hotel hotel bristol i 
almost stayed at that hotel i almost did there's some skyscrapers high rises that's 
probably the direction we'll go next   all right so now we are coming up to 
the saxon garden we're heading kind of   into the interior you can see the art gallery 
there gorgeous and that amazing structure right   behind it let's go into the saxon garden as 
we continue to cruise around here in warsaw a gorgeous city on a gorgeous 
day here in july it's a saturday the temperature is around 85 to 86 degrees 
fahrenheit and 32 degrees celsius thereabouts depending on what app you're using   do you get the idea i think this 
is the tomb of the unknown soldier so definitely show respect here as i was telling you previously 
they had gone through a lot here in poland between russia and germany and even 
with the eu they've kind of been volleyed around and still a great place to 
be look at this saxon garden gorgeous huh all right so as we head across the street here towards the palace cultural center 
they've got a mcdonald's tower right there   i don't think i've ever seen a 
corporate tower for mcdonald's i could probably ride that 
tram that'd probably help me   save the blisters on my feet because 
i do have one on my left foot there's the palace cultural 
center that i'm trying to go to there goes the tram go buddy go all right so we're definitely in 
the old no we're definitely out of the old and   into the new and this is the new warsaw it's 
very vibrant it's actually where my hotel is   pretty much get anything down here food 
drinks cafes haircuts nail salons you name it   very modern it's a nice little 
blend of old and new here in warsaw oh dude they got a hop chop barber shop i'm 
going to see if they got any seats let's see   please have a seat please 
have a seat for a barber shop   in my hair getting it shampooed first and 
then we'll get a haircut and a beer trim before and after let's see [Music]   very good haircut she took good care of me   and uh definitely recommend that place 
especially if you get this uh barber that   i got but all the barbers in there were really 
amazing like they care about their job for sure all right so we are now coming up to the cultural 
center of the science and culture right here   what an amazing structure that looks like i 
guess it was built in the 1950s i went and   got that haircut now all of a sudden the uh 
it's overcast the blue skies are gone amazing all right i think it's actually 
closed i'm not going to go in here   you can see the coca-cola building 
next to the mcdonald's building   and then some modern buildings here 
i'm actually going to head towards this   intercontinental which i think is a hotel back 
towards my hotel which is the westin those birds um i would put warsaw on the level of 
top five in europe top ten top five salah congratzola club music tourist 
information this is more of like the modern   warsaw area right here so we're going to this mall 
here called the taurosai okay i actually look for some clothes i've only got 
one pair of shorts i'm transitioning out of pants   back into shorts so i'm going to be 
looking for a men's clothing store   if i could find one nice little mall here just a regular modern mall but you can 
see they do have modern malls here so   if that's your cup of tea there you go levi's boss hugo boss maybe they have some shorts   van graff the wrangler tommy i like tommy 
maybe they got like a better variety in this   store here all right so i ended up 
getting some shorts from van graff there   and it is looking super ominous all of a 
sudden i would have never thought this would   have just popped out but uh right around here 
actually is a wall of the old ghetto so this is kind of like the old ghetto wall here i guess probably which tells 
you that this whole area   was a warsaw ghetto back in 
the world war ii era and before   now it's just been turned into a great place to 
shop around now i don't know where to go let's see better get back to my hotel 
actually i think it's gonna rain well at least show us what 
the underground looks like true there's a lot of young people in warsaw 
this is a young person city for sure   i wonder if there's the 
university here or something bus tram i wonder if this is actually where i can my hotel's so nearby i'm not going 
to ride it anywhere but i wonder if   i can actually catch the train to crack 
out from here oh it's not too far down   it's actually like one story below there 
i don't know if you guys can see it so it's like one story below where we're at 
it's not one of those like super submerged like   five stories below helsinki or stockholm style windy down here considering 
uh we're under the underground there's a big storm moving in all right okay i think it's time to go inside after 
what i'm seeing pop off around me here there's a big lightning rod 
right at the top of that tower well as you can see the storm took over   and yeah it definitely took over but anyways 
that's going to wrap up this episode of island   hopper tv from warsaw poland a beautiful day 
in the morning turned into a rainy afternoon   that's okay perfect for editing and we will see 
you guys on the next video thanks to all the new   subscribers and turn on that bell if you guys want 
to get notified when these videos come out [Music]   you|||This video was made possible by Skillshare. The first 500 viewers to use the link below to sign up,
can start learning for free for two months. Stick around to find out more. A Poland left beaten, a Poland left broken. Stripped of their right to assembly,
and their right to their language. A multi-ethnic population, now absorbed into 3 separate empires. With tensions with France rising in the West, and all 3 of these nations coming into Napoleon's crosshairs - - what was the future of Poland to be? The turn of the century brought with it uncertainty, rebellion, and hiding beneath it all: a spark of nationalism, ready to be stoked. *Intro music and whatnot* Life under imperial rule wasn't great, and the Poles
began searching for a way out almost immediately. Restrictions had been placed on their language and religion. They were treated as second class citizens. Many musicians, artisans, poets and engineers, all fled
political persecution, and lived out their days in exile. A people hard to quell, a people in search of solidarity. If only they could get help from someone on the outside. Napoleon: a despot, a tyrant,
a threat to the monarchy. Or, a champion of the Republic,
a breaker of subjugations. A military genius with bold ambition. Napoleon was all of these things, and none of them. But to the Poles... to the Poles, he was hope. Poland ended up being an important ally of Napoleon during his coalition wars. And he had granted them autonomy under the Duchy of Warsaw, in gratitude for their help. But after the failed invasion of Russia,
the Poles found themselves once again occupied, by the advancing Russians, who then annexed more territory, than they had in the partitions. The brief rebellion by the Polish people,
now vanished with Napoleon's exile. So, was it all nor nothing then?
Well, not really. The Age of Rebellion kept alive the spark,
that had burned brightly with Napoleon. Uprising after uprising was fought,
and each generation was taught of the one, that had preceded it - inspiring new resentment and new rebellion. The Poles found solidarity in their religion, their language and their customs. Eventually forming a romantic nationalism, that would not be snuffed out. Instead of being successful militarily, they were successful in keeping the Polish spirit alive. Along with influential people, like Mickiewicz and Chopin. As the decades crept by, and the hope for Poland seemed lost, there began to appear some light on the horizon. The Prussians and Austrians had gone to war for supremacy over German nation-state, and Germany had been born out of the rubble. This, for many reasons, was not good. Suddenly, Europe's intricate balance of power had been destroyed. A war for dominance over the continent seems inevitable in hindsight to us now; but in those days it was diplomats, who saw the coming danger. Pressure was building, diplomacy was failing. Power was imbalanced. Something had to give... but what? World War I began with Austria and Serbia. But soon, turned into a multi-alliance pan-European war, fought on every part of the continent. The former allies of Austria, Germany and Russia were now enemies. The former Polish lands were the epicenter of the Eastern front, and Polish armies fought on both sides. And both sides were promising the Poles their freedom, in exchange for their help. Eventually, the Russians and Romanians would be defeated, and forced to hand over all their Polish lands to Germany, in a peace treaty. Setting up and occupied piece of territory for Polish people, they more than likely had no intention of letting them keep. But with Russia knocked out of the war,
the Americans had entered it, and one of Woodrow Wilson's 14 points, was support for a liberated Poland. With the defeat of Germany in 1918, Polish officials reclaimed much of their former territory. And Józef Piłsudski was installed as the new leader of Poland, after a 123 years of foreign rule. But the fight was not over. The Bolshevik Revolution had left Russia to fight a brutal civil war, and once it was over, the Red Army set its sights on the Polish lands, they had recently lost. The brave Polish armies lined up to defend their homeland. Defending their capital of Warsaw,
they stood ready for battle. Against all the odds, the Poles would go on to lead a seemingly miraculous defeat of the Red Army. In a stunning display of incredible bravery, and military prowess, the II Polish Republic was here to stay. Polish leader Józef Piłsudski envisioned the recreation of the multicultural Poland of the past. And reflected in this, the Second Polish Republic
was among the most diverse at the time. The next few years, usually called the "interwar period",
was dominated by strong, political rhetoric, radical ideas, and a high focus on foreign policy. That being said, it wasn't the most stable government.
There were even a couple of coups, here and there. Across the border, in Germany,
things were pretty bad as well. The crippled economy and political turmoil, had allowed a radical like Adolf Hitler to come to power in 1933. Introducing sweeping reforms of government,
and seizing dictatorial-like powers, it was not long, before Poland came into Hitler's crosshairs. Invading the Republic would allow Hitler to attain many of his short-term goals. Such as: seizing the industrial heartland,
and reaffirming Germany as a military power. But also, his long-term goals, of eradicating Jews and other undesirables, and invading his arch-rivals, the Communist USSR. But in a completely unexpected move,
the Germans signed the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact, secretly dividing Poland into two spheres of influence,
hoping to bide their time, and not fight a two-front war. (Good job guys, I think that'll work out.) The German army invaded Poland on the 1st of September, 1939, beginning the Second World War. They were the first to taste the German "Blitzkrieg",
a radical, new form of Lightning warfare, designed to punch deep into enemy lines,
and surround them, cutting off their defenses. Poland was not ready for this. Europe was not ready for this. The World was not ready for the Blitzkrieg. Poland fought bravely in defense of their homeland,
but they were defeated in a few short weeks, Warsaw being heavily bombed until September 27th. Just to briefly clear something up:
one myth spread by German propaganda, was the ineptitude of the Polish army, using
sabered cavalry against the German Panzers. Which is completely false, there is
no record of this ever happening. And both sides had heavily armed cavalry units, it wasn't that uncommon. The fall of Warsaw, however,
would not be the end of the fight. Thousands of troops evacuated, and joined the armies of the Allied Powers, and continued to fight thoughout the war. Many thousands more, civilians and soldiers,
went into underground resistance, in towns and forests, to continue fighting the Germans and the Russians. Poland was one of the worst-faired nations in World War II. Combined military and civilian casualties, Poland lost
the highest percentage of any population in the war. With one fifth of Polish citizens dying in combat, or in mass executions. Of the 6 million Jews killed during
the Holocaust, half of them were Polish. As the Red Army advanced into Polish territory in 1944, the army in Warsaw rebelled against the German occupiers. They hoped, that the Soviets would join them to retake the city from the Nazis. But this would not happen. The Soviets were not their allies. Nor did they come as liberators. And stopped outside of Warsaw, and watched and waited, as the Germans slaughtered the Polish resistance, ignoring their radio calls for help. Once the Polish army was killed, and the Germans had retreated, the Red Army marched into the pile of rubble,
where Warsaw had once stood. The Red Army had also uncovered the brutal death camps in Poland, set up to exterminate Jews and other minority groups by the Nazis. News of this horror would soon spread throughout the world. With the Polish foreign army, and the domestic army now fighting on both fronts, the European theater ended with a joint occupation of Germany, by the Allied armies in the West,
and the Red Army in the East, in 1945. Poland lay in waste and ruins, swapping out one occupying army with another. And one madman dictator, for another. For better or worse, the Red Army was once again on polish soil, and the atrocities and war crimes the committed on their advance, meant, that their stay would likely be an unpleasant one. Uncertainty was on everyone's mind. The citizens of this central European nation could
feel Stalin's cold, clammy hands on their throat. Would their sovereignty stay intact? Would they remain a people inspired by liberty and stoicism? How could they face the challenge, of rebuilding their nation, and come to terms with the brutality of the Holocaust? As the British, French, and Americans strained they eyes, to watch and see, what the Soviet government was going to do next, their view became obscured by a giant, iron curtain. Well, the story doesn't end there,
so stay tuned for Part 3. Remember to subscribe, to never miss out on a new video. Do you have a project in mind,
you've been holding off on? Well, Skillshare can help. The first 500 viewers to sign up using the link below, can gain a head start, by learning valuable skills, for free for two months. One of the most common questions
I'm asked, is how I make these videos. And the answer is, that I use a software called Adobe Illustrator, to create my assets, and After Effects to animate it altogether. And these are immensely powerful tools, that can make even the most ambitious projects a reality. But they come with a pretty steep learning curve. Skillshare has thousands of courses,
designed to help you learn a new skill. You can learn to start your own project,
with an easy-to-follow course, like "After Effects for beginners",
or "Illustrator for beginners". Whether it's a school project, a business venture,
or even starting your own YouTube channel, these great tutorials will give you the perfect head start. Again, the first 500 to sign up with the link below,
will get two months of learning for free. After that, it's just $10 per month. Thanks to Skillshare for their support,
and to all those helping the Suibhne channel. Like, comment, subscribe - until next time. [outro music]|||TERRELL: MAJOR RUSSIAN AIR STRIKES ACROSS UKRAINIAN CITIES, INCLUDING KYIV. UKRAINIAN OFFICIALS SAY 85 MISSILES HAVE TARGETED THE COUNTRY'S ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE. THIS RUSSIAN BARRAGE OF AIR STRIKES STARTED, OF COURSE|||[Music] today we will visit the heart of Upper Silesia Katowice from major industry to unusual tourism visitors will experience an in-your-face landscape from A to Z I started my trip on the town's Market Square between 2011 and 2017 the cattle beats and market square was heavily renovated it has a new face today with many modern buildings mixed in with the old it's something of an architectural cockta most of the 19th century buildings were demolished but today this space is equipped with pubs summer gardens and cosy interiors wonderful place to come and meet up with friends Marriott's go Street is one of the most important streets in the shrewdest Meester district packed within a few hundred meters there are almost twenty taverns many restaurants bistros and nightclubs making it the most lively part of town the street also has lovely historic tenement houses and serves pedestrian traffic only as if that's not enough there are thirty beautiful cherry trees to top it all off [Music] caryl Shamanov ski Academy of Music in Katowice is the oldest university in Upper Silesia functioning until the outbreak of world war ii the conservatory was the most important musical institution in the providence nowadays the academy cooperates with music schools all over the world including more than 60 partner institutions within the Erasmus program a superb piece of national Polish heritage is the nicky soviets district you'll know it by its uniquely uniform architecture gruesome watertower leering smokestacks and church spire [Music] these gorgeous tenement houses were once inhabited by workers who travel to Katowice from outside the city limits today it's become something of a culture center including one of the city's finest restaurants prohibition slums venya here has international options many polish dishes but today we are going to focus on Silesian regional cuisine we have jewelry which is a polish classic we've featured before on on discover but this is made in a regional sense it's far less creamy has white sausage and thick chunks and a nice scoop of potato the south korean korean module transition or national squeeze bars again yes the national equation I'm on such a disruption of digital some cool new ruler dynamic wasn't an salon kill bass ball track categories Bardo setter at South Pacific tuna Lunas total total rule podium is destined for anemic art of la me to some geologists abalone yotaka - she's now a product see via walkie Obersalzberg at sana a loop took to keep receivable schedule a la marquise my favorite thing about jorik is the fact that all the flavors unite to perfection in your mouth but you'd have to come here and eat it yourself to know what I'm talking about due to the fact that the establishment is located in a 100-year old tenement house diners enjoy a unique interior and atmosphere of the 1920s almost every evening you can enjoy live chamber concerts and performances ranging from jazz to blues [Music] founded in 1929 the Silesia Museum is a perfect place for those of you who are unfamiliar with the region especially when considering that the exhibition's are located in underground mining towns the most valuable collection of the Silesia museum includes a collection of polish pre and post 1945 paintings additionally you can enjoy on professional art artistic and documentary photography polish posters and polish stage art we caught up with museum staff to learn more [Music] misawa's cave Katowice EST de new museum Paul sector I present to you Galleria Sookie pod Jamie on Naboo cost an estimated operation remulak - ow NASA er ers Galleria to represent EMM national design sir Moo's own transcript cutter be type of style of teaching unity which is them Jovanka Morocco yet nag Jewish Muslim Chomsky Gustav of Silvana initiative exchange imitate just enjoyment in Roku those Nevaeh teacher on she does for teaching units mission team Spartan rock pool today Muslims table cover name Budhan could have negative children kitab it's not a mascot study glad naidu a ship the Salafi bars effectively Shi Jie bian Nova Buddha Renee Natalie near buuck open meat cutter bits el taco pioneer post our dish and social simplest in church in Morocco but not bone Ferdinand Gruber wrote just cut a bit Naberius temple scheme the Copiah in our surge in the baggage it's a 20-minute scheme just our champagne toast appreciation June situations even to Morocco for calculator to sponsorship rates' nosiness break training he would've on Nova Gorica building KO dongjun's gig of Katowice [Music] one of the most exciting features that this museum has for tourists is this incredible viewing platform that was a minor's elevated renovated into an observation point available to you [Music] and these communist-era blocks are so iconic for the region a lot of people actually find them to be intimidating or off-putting but I think that it cast uniqueness here that you won't see in the future in Poland that's for sure some consider them to be scars of the past some consider them to be former works of art I guess the opinion is in the eye of the beholder one of the most infamous buildings is known as super yet noski as one of the largest residential buildings in Poland the BOK was constructed between 1967 and 1969 at almost 190 meters in length and 60 meters height it was created due to the drastically increasing number of inhabitants moving to Katowice in the 20th century [Music] the 1976 this epic statue was unveiled commemorating the uprising and insurgency against German authorities in the region the monument has the form of three eagle wings symbolizing the three so lazing uprisings from 1919 to 1921 it is considered to be one of the most recognizable symbols of Katowice [Music] after Stalin died the poles were able to move on from social realism architecture to more exciting frontiers spa tech which is the arena behind me as an example of that opened in 1971 had an indoor ice skating ring gym hotel complex parking lots it was the largest and grandest facility of its time into the 80s and 90s it was one of the only arenas that could host major concerts for bands like Metallica today it is still a very very tender spot in the parts of polls the city bats once constituted a fairly common element of the landscape of Polish cities erected between 1894 and 1895 in an eclectic style the structures have seen several reconstructions the decoration of the windows are worth noting this is where the real architectural masterpiece takes place unfortunately it's impossible to bathe here today [Music] Katowice is a very unique place with its own cuisine dialect people who are very specific in a good way of course I recommend that you come and experience it with your own eyes and until you do I Ryan so cash for London [Music]|||- Today, I'm going house hunting for the very first time in my life. This is interesting. (upbeat music) And guess what? I'm house hunting in the
mountains of Southern Poland. There's a magic here. So today I get to check out some really interesting properties, ranging from the very
rundown to the very plush. But will any of them
turn out to be the one? This place is one in a million. Here's a bit of context. Over the last year or so, I've been dreaming of
finding a place to call home. And originally I imagined that to be in the Western United States. Last year when I spent a month in Montana, I just felt so at home. I really felt like that was my place. But given the craziness of the
real estate market in the US, I kind of gave up on that dream. And honestly, that's a
pretty hard reality check. So last week, I shipped my
entire life back to Europe, including my truck, all my
stuff, and my dog, Vilk. Hey buddy, does Europe smell different? So, I guess that means
I'm kind of committing to finding something out here. (foreign language) Let's see if I can find my dream
property in the Motherland. Yes, I wanna have something
equally traditional, but. Well, welcome to Poland. I am Polish, in case you didn't know, although, I haven't lived
here in over 20 years. I moved away when I was a kid and spent most of my life in the UK. And to be completely honest with you, I didn't think I'd ever
come back, not to live here, or at least, not to try and
find a place to live here. But here we are in my search for a home, I have come to the Carpathian
Mountains in Southern Poland, one of the most magical places in Europe. And today I'm gonna see if I can find a place to potentially call home. (Eva laughing) Isn't that kind of crazy? Isn't that just so wild, that
I could live here, maybe? (car engine starting) I knew exactly who to call upon to learn more about life in the mountains. They've been living
here for over 10 years, and in that time they've managed to build a true slice of heaven,
largely by themselves, but they started out
with just a ruined barn, little money and a big dream. Here, I brought them a gift
all the way from Montana. Hope they enjoy it. - Wow. - This is Gorna Chata. A small boutique hotel
that Kasia and Leszek lovingly built on the
side of this mountain over the last decade. It's so hard to describe in words the level of silence and serenity I feel every time I come to visit them. If I could move in here
tomorrow, I probably would, (Eva laughing) but since that's not really an option, I'll have to find my own oasis. And I still think this is one
of the most magical places in all of Europe, if not the world, the Carpathian Mountains. It's, yeah, probably my favorite
spot on the continent. You know, it's kind of
funny how this is really such a gem and it's kind
of still a hidden gem. I mean, in Eastern Europe, you know, people know about the
Carpathian Mountains, but out west, nobody
knows about this place, which is what makes it so
special and so pristine, still. (calm music) And I think that's why
I would like to come and maybe live here, because
it still feels wild. Since I came here for the
first time two years ago, I have just been completely in love with what Kasia and
Leszek have created here. And quite honestly, I kind of wanna use some of
their ideas as inspiration for my future home. So I'm gonna go and
check out their cottages, which are for rent, by the way, and see what I like about them. 'Cause man, this is like, this place is one in a million. It's incredible. (serene music) This kind of bathtub, oh yes. Okay, but the best part about this cottage and the one that I find most inspiring is this upstairs area. (serene music) Oh my God, I remember sitting
here in this very hammock two years ago and thinking about how much I wanna make a
place like this my home. Someday you'll see me
making videos about building a wooden hut in the forest. And now I'm back and I'm
actually looking around. (serene music) So, this living room here is,
obviously, absolutely huge. And I probably wouldn't need
a dining table this big, but I just love the like earthy feel here. I love all the decor. I love how light it feels. There's so much light coming in. I love the fairy lights,
obviously, they're so cute. Okay, so then, they've
got this beautiful terrace with a tree growing
through the middle of it. How cool is that? You know, there's a
million holiday cottages and home designs out there that, you know, are really beautiful and
luxurious and that look natural, but Kasia and Leszek, I
think can teach me a lot about like how to integrate
nature into my future house. They're like all about
sustainability, truly and deeply. They're about unique design
and, you know, they're vegan. They have animals that they
take care of here on this land, but you know, that don't work or anything. I'm happy to have them as teachers. So I'm gonna go and ask
them some questions about what it's like to live here and whether my dream of possibly building a house here is actually realistic. It might give me a reality check, but I need to know. I need to know. (upbeat music) But before we get into the hot tub, a quick word from the
partner of this video and one of my ultimate
travel hacks, Surfshark VPN. Today we're gonna learn
about the advantages of using Surfshark VPN with Vilk. Hey buddy, did you say you
had some questions about VPNs? (dog grunting) (upbeat music) Well, buddy, since we travel so much, we're usually using hotel and Airbnb wifi, and there's really no way to know whether any of those
networks are actually safe. They do give us a sense of false security, but they could actually be
hiding many different privacy and security threats. Got it? Still following? (dog grunting) So if you ever use
unfamiliar wifi networks to make online purchases or access any kind of personal data, including online banking, you could be compromising your privacy. So to prevent that, I
just turn on Surfshark VPN and it keeps my location secret and encrypts, basically
secures, all of my online data. (dog panting) Yes, I'm glad you asked. So Surfshark allows you to access content and content streaming services
from all around the world. For example, if you wanna watch reruns of your favorite show, but it's not available
on the Netflix catalog in your country, you can just switch locations
and look in another country. For me, that's definitely "The Office". Oh, I guess he doesn't
know what "The Office" is. Well, I think I've got something that you might like in the UK. (wolf howling) Well, we've already got our Surfshark VPN, so we're good to go. And you guys can also benefit
from a Black Friday deal. Just go to this link, enter
my promo code, evazubeck and enjoy up to six months of free VPN. I also left the link in
the description box below. Oh, and by the way, there's a
30 day money back guarantee, so there is really no
risk in trying it out. Well, safe to say that
Kasia and Leszek gave me just the push I needed to get out there and start seeing some actual
properties in the area. But before going totally
in on the wild idea, I wanted to see what's out there. And the first property I'm going to visit is this ruin of a
mountain hut in the woods. It looks like this is the
road that the hut is on, and if it's true, then
that means that the hut is really close to the main road, which is a bit of a bummer. I kind of, I wanted to go somewhere a little bit more remote, but let's see, let's check it out. Maybe I'm wrong. Okay, this is not it. But I was told that I
should go across this plot and into the woods, somewhere over there. When I called a real estate
agent about this place, she said that these buildings
here will be taken down because the person that built
them didn't actually have a building permission. So, yeah, that sucks. (intense music) Okay, I think I see the hut. It's right here. Oh my God. (Eva laughing) This is, this is interesting. (intense music) Hey buddy, do you like it? It's absolutely gorgeous. It's a traditional Polish,
Carpathian Mountain hut, built in the traditional style. You know, this is the kind of hut that shepherds would've lived in, and you still see a lot of these buildings all around this region. So, I don't have the keys because
the real estate agent said I could just look inside to see for myself the state of the place. Huh. Yeah. Wow. That's bad. (Eva giggling) That's so, so bad. Nah, absolutely not. I mean, it's, it is a ruin, but I think that's almost secondary. The main thing is the hut is right next to a
really busy, really loud road, and it is $125,000 for a very
small plot of land and a ruin and a really bad location. I mean, seeing it, I'm like, yes, I wanna have something
equally traditional, but hearing it,
(Eva giggling) I also know that I just
wanna be as far away from roads as possible. So, yeah, this bacowka is not for me. Let's get outta here, buddy. (serene music) I would say that this property here, was like on the lower end
of the spectrum for me. As in, I would only invest
in renovating a mountain hut if it had like a really
spectacular location, you know? Then I might think about it, but this is not it, so. There's a few more places
I wanna check out though, so all isn't lost. Let's go and see them. After seeing this bacowka or mountain hut, I thought back to what Kasia and Leszek shared with me earlier. This next house I'm about to see is very, very, very different. I'm kind of excited to see it. The villa we're about to see is definitely way out of my price range, but you know, it can't hurt to see a
beautiful mountain home for some inspiration. This is a very plush,
turnkey villa overlooking the Podhale Mountains. This house is so beautiful. (serene music) (Eva sighing) Oh my God, such a dream. (serene violin music) Okay, wow, I can already see it's so huge. So this is the living room and there's a pretty small kitchen here, and it's all just decked out
in this beautiful natural wood. And this fireplace, also super traditional
Polish old-school style and I definitely want
one of those in my house in the future. All right, well, let's check it out. It's pretty huge, so, we better get going. So there's an office here downstairs, which is very lovely. Okay, room number one. Room number two, three, and room number four. Okay, I guess this is the master bedroom. So nice. And here is one of the bathrooms. What is that? (Eva giggling) Oh my God, is this like a, oh my God, it's like a sit-in sauna. That is wild. But this is not everything, there's also like a whole basement area. Room number 85, room number (door opening) 86, room number 87. Oh, what's this? It's locked. (Eva knocking) That's kind of creepy, like the entrance to a secret tunnel or a torture chamber or something. (door closing) I think I wanna get outta here now. Well, this house is such a dream house. The architecture is so perfect. It's exactly how I would
want my future house to look, but this is not the one because it's way too big. It's so huge. I don't even need a building
half this size, you know? I mean, yes, there is a beautiful view, but only if you look that way. If you look to the right and to the left, you've got neighbors and the garden is very small. So for about four, just over $400,000, nah, this is not the one. Knowing the price and
the size of this villa I thought back to what Kasia
and Leszek shared with me when we met up. Well, let's recap. Renovating a total ruin
next to a busy road, uh, not an option. A plush turnkey mansion with an epic view but loads of neighbors and too much space and also too expensive, not an option either. But there's one more. Okay, here we are, this is the last house that I'll be seeing today. It's a bit of a wild card, I'll admit, but I was just really curious to see what it would be like to live
in the middle of a village in a really beautiful historic house. So, let's see. (serene music) If you can ignore my
shoddy camera work here, that would be very appreciated, thank you. This house has been standing on its own and abandoned for almost 30 years, and in that time, nobody
has paid the light bills. It was a strange mix of the
two properties I saw earlier. A bit of a ruin, yet retaining some of that
traditional mountain grandeur with beautiful wooden interiors, those dreamy Eastern European
stoves and fireplaces, and clearly, a lot of work ahead for anyone willing to invest in it. There's even a little side house, what we might traditionally
call an (foreign language) in Polish. A small room with many functions and sometimes, a whole
family living inside it. I mean, such a cool
idea to like go in there and restore a house like that, but I won't even know
where to begin, you know. That is just such a huge project. And the house is in the middle of village, which I didn't quite appreciate. So it's not really the kind of, you know, natural oasis that I've been dreaming of. So, not the one. None of those three
houses were quite right. So far, I wasn't finding
anything even remotely realistic, but then again, I wasn't really expecting to find anything right away. Instead, I was hoping to use
this as a learning experience, you know, to see what's even out there. And here are my biggest takeaways. A traditional architectural
style, yes, a big yes. A great view, another yes. Ah! A big plot of land, yep. Neighbors, nope. Size, you know what they say about size. No, but seriously, something
small will suffice. Well, I loved seeing all three properties and learning more about what
I liked and didn't like, but for now, winter is quickly arriving in the Polish mountains and that is not a good time
to house hunt out here. The snow gets serious. So I'm gonna keep my eyes peeled
on the real estate websites and hopefully come back
in a couple of months to see if anything else has popped up. But for now, I am headed south, much further south,
towards warmer weather. Hey, if you'd like for your
name to appear in these credits or if you'd like to get early access to all of my YouTube videos, or if you'd like to get
access to my making off slash behind the scenes videos for every single film
that I publish on YouTube, you may wanna subscribe
to my Patreon community. There's loads of different perks. Patreon is where I
usually post my early life and travel updates, where I make loads of exclusive content and we get a chance to connect
on live calls, as well. It's a really, really great community and yeah, if you'd like to see more of me, this is the link, somewhere
here, on the screen. Anyway, see you in the next video.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Hello Hello! Today's sign is from Poland (P-O-L-A-N-D) that I will teach you. Now today is the last day of this week focused on "SIGN." Just so you know, most countries typically sign the gesture SIGN or SIGN That's why I teach you the few, five, that are unique, okay? But today I saved for last, why? It's a complicated one! Poland's sign is SIGN SIGN This motion obviously is similar to the common "sign" which is interesting. And this motion is similar to ASL's "sign" right? So maybe Poland decided to pick two different signs and combine them, who knows? ;) But thank you for watching this whole week! If you want me to teach a specific word over the next 1-2 weeks let me know by commenting below, okay? Thanks for the support! See ya tomorrow!|||Under the cover of darkness on September 7th,
1512, near the village of Pashino, deep in Muscovite territory, a group of Poles were building
pontoon bridges on the Dnieper in order to cross the river. Next to them, smaller groups of light cavalry swam
across and proceeded to dry their clothes and armour. Infantrymen floated on rafts to reach the
left bank of the river, while the main part of the Polish-Lithuanian army waited for the
construction of the bridges to be completed. Once the engineers completed the job, parts
of the infantry started to cross the bridge, followed by cannons and heavy cavalry. But… unable to carry the weight, one of
the bridges collapsed. Despite these difficulties, by early morning
the Polish-Lithuanian army, totalling 30,000 men, was ready to move east to recapture the
important Lithuanian fortress of Smolensk. But… in front of them stood the Muscovite
army, twice as big, and deployed in battle formation. The  Grand  Duchy of Lithuania united with Poland in 1386,
under the rule of the Jagiellon dynasty. This powerful new state was comprised of Polish,
Lithuanian, and Ruthenian lands, as well as territories conquered in the East by the Lithuanian
dukes over the course of the fourteenth century. This expansion, however, clashed with the
ambitions of a new emerging power in Eastern Europe. The Muscovite princes had finally thrown off
the Mongol yoke, which lasted for nearly TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY years. It was now time to look outwards. Their objective was to unite all lands populated
by the Ruthenian- and Russian-speaking peoples, but this would have to come at the expense
of Lithuania. And, during the rule of the Grand Prince Vasili
III, Moscow’s western expansion pushed the border to the Dnieper river. This drastic shift in the balance of power
convinced the King of Poland, Sigismund I, who had until now largely stayed out of any
conflicts in the East, to intervene. But Sigismund faced a problem. During the early 16th century, the kingdom’s
General Parliament grew into a powerful political institution, becoming one of the primary elements
of democratic governance in the Polish dominion. This limited the power of the Crown. Without Parliament approval, the King could
no longer unilaterally pass new laws, nor freely use the kingdom’s annual tax income
for military spending. In effect, Sigismund was not able to wield
the same power his predecessors once could. Complicating matters further, in 1512, Albert
of Prussia became the new Grand Master of the Teutonic Order and had refused to acknowledge
Poland’s suzerainty, thus breaking an oath of fealty to the Polish King. Worse, to alleviate pressure on Lithuania,
Sigismund plotted with the Crimean Khan to attack the Grand Duchy of Moscow from the
south – a plot that Vasili’s spies had uncovered. Pretext in hand, the Grand Prince was not
about to pass up on the opportunity to take advantage of the changing political dynamics
in Poland to continue Moscow’s territorial expansion. He tasked the Boyar Ivan Andreyevich Chelyadnin
with supervising the campaign to take the strategically vital city of Smolensk. This city was of huge strategic importance
for Vasili, because to attack Moscow, any hostile army that was located further west
would have to pass right through Smolensk. Worse, while in enemy hands, this well-fortified
city also threatened the military endeavours of the Russians, so the one who controlled
it held a very favorable strategic position. At the time of this attack, the Muscovites
also tried to attack Polotsk, but this was unsuccessful, so these forces were diverted
towards the siege of Smolensk. In the meantime, a little further south, the
Grand Hetman of Lithuania Konstanty Ostrogski invaded Moscow’s territory and inflicted
heavy defeats on the Muscovite army in the region of Severia in several smaller battles. Here he defeated about 6000 Russians. But with the small number of troops at his
disposal, he could not oppose the main army of Vasili III that besieged Smolensk. A six- and four-week siege followed in 1513,
both unsuccessful, but the Muscovite forces succeeded in taking the city in July 1514,
dealing a serious blow to Lithuania. Encouraged by their success, the Russians
conquered several smaller fortresses in the surrounding area and despite their large army,
they decided to stop there. After the fall of the most important Lithuanian
fortress on the eastern border, the focus of the Polish parliament and nobility was
finally directed towards the war with the Grand Duchy of Moscow. After long preparations during the summer
of 1514, the King of Poland and the Grand Duke of Lithuania gathered around 35,000 soldiers
under his command. The soldiers primarily came from Poland and
Lithuania and were mostly horsemen, but certain mercenary contingents also joined the campaign,
along with volunteer detachments from Bohemia. Most importantly, large numbers of artillery
pieces were gathered to help recapture the lost fortress of Smolensk. From Vilnius, the Polish-Lithuanian army moved
south-east and stopped at Minsk to unite with units arriving from all over the country. After Minsk, Sigismund continued towards the
eastern border to confront the Muscovites. Soon he reached the city of Borisov, a key
crossing over the imposing Berezina river. There, he handed over command of the majority
of the army to Hetman Konstanty Ostrogski, while he remained in this position with about
5,000 men. Ostrogski continued with the main army towards
the Dnieper River, which he had to cross in order to recapture city of Smolensk. Meanwhile, Ivan Chelyadnin, having learned
about the movement of the enemy, had gathered the scattered Muscovite troops and decided
to confront the Polish-Lithuanian Army. However, his scouts reported that Ostrogski
had a fairly large host under his command, so Chelyadnin decided to receive the battle
in a more favourable position. He retreated from Drutsk even further east
while slowing down the enemy's advance with smaller detachments. Then he crossed the Dnieper River and developed
his battle positions to meet the enemy. The town of Orsha was a suitable river crossing
due to the existence of two bridges in close proximity, which allowed for a quick transfer
of troops. This was precisely what the Russian commanders
counted on, because the Polish-Lithuanian army had to first cross the Dnieper, before
they could continue towards Smolensk. Indeed, on September 6, 1514, Hetman Ostrogski
arrived near Orsha. There he halted his army to reconnoitre the
terrain and prepare his army for the crossing. Although the army of the Grand Duchy of Moscow
was larger, Ivan Chelyadnin wanted to avoid a risky encounter. Instead, he patiently waited and observed
the enemy, planning to attack while they were still developing their battle formations. Chelyadnin's army was predominantly composed
of cavalry, but its’ size is difficult to estimate. Some sources claim that it numbered as many
as 80,000 men. While the Muscovites definitely had a numerical
advantage, the actual size of their army was much smaller, with the range between 40,000
and 60,000 troops being more likely. The Muscovites waited for two days for the
Polish-Lithuanian army to make the first move. But what they failed to realise was that only
a portion of the enemy army was present. Ostrogski anticipated that Chelyadnin would
contest the crossing, so he spread out smaller units of Lithuanian cavalry across a wide
area and had ordered the men to set up additional tents, light numerous camp fires, and make
a lot of noise, to create the illusion that the entire Polish-Lithuanian army was at Orsha. The ruse worked. While the Muscovites expected to contest the
crossing at Orsha, some 5 kilometres (just over 3 miles) northeast, Ostrogski had two
pontoon bridges constructed and moved the majority of his army across the river, during
the night. When Chelyadnin finally learned of the movements,
he rushed towards Pashino, but by then the Polish-Lithuanian army had already crossed. Ostrogski forces found themselves on a plain
cut by a ravine with the river behind them. Not far in front of them, a more numerous
army of Muscovites took up position. Both sides realized that a pitched battle
was upon them. Muscovites were composed of five large cavalry
regiments. The most numerous was under the command of
Chelyadnin, in the center. In front of it was a smaller vanguard contingent. Stationed on each side were cavalry regiments. The reserves were positioned in the rear. The Muscovite army numbered between 40,000
and 60,000 troops. The Polish-Lithuanian Army formed in its classic
formation, The Old Polish Order. On the right, Sampoliński commanded the first
Polish line, comprised mostly of better equipped and heavy cavalry, while Świerczowski led
the second and third. On the left, Ostrogski took charge of the
Lithuanians in the front, with the second and third line commanded by Jerzy Radziwiłł. All told, some 30,000 Polish-Lithuanian troops
took to the field. Around 2 PM, Ivan Chelyadnin ordered his army
to attack. The Muscovite plan was to use the terrain,
especially the ravines and various bushes, in order to surprise the enemy, but their
movements were spotted in time. The Muscovite vanguard took part in this attack, as well as
the right wing under the command of Mikhail Golitsa. As the Russian vanguard was spotted, it was attacked by
Lithuanian auxiliary troops with a hail of arrows. Muscovites responded with arrows volleys of
their own and a fierce battle began between Lithuanian and Russian archers. In the meantime, Ostrogski saw that the biggest
threat to his army was the Russian right wing, which tried to sneak up and attack the Lithuanian
left flank. In order to eliminate this danger, he could
rush towards the enemy and stop him; BUT since he mostly had light cavalry under his command,
it was questionable whether they would be able to stop the more numerous Muscovite right
wing. His lightly armoured cavalry would be especially
exposed to enemy’s arrows, and in case of a defeat on the left wing, he could lose control
over the pontoon bridges he had built earlier, which would lead to a catastrophic situation. Because of this, he ordered Sampoliński to
attack these enemy units so that instead of the light Lithuanian, the enemy would face
the heavy Polish cavalry. The Polish horsemen rode straight through
the arrow volleys exchanged by the Lithuanian auxiliaries and the Russian vanguard, and
having suffered minimal losses they crashed into Mikhail Golitsa's flank. The momentum of the Polish charge caused chaos
in the Russian ranks, leading to panic and confusion. Responding quickly, Chelyadnin ordered his
left wing forward. Wanting to break the enemy line, he focused
the attack was the now weakened Polish right wing. Outnumbered 3:1 on this part of the front,
the Polish hussars and light cavalry managed to hold off the more numerous opponent with
fierce charges, followed by quick retreats. However, Chelyadnin still hadn’t committed
his center. He watched the fight on the wings and sent
reinforcements when needed. Thus, seeing the difficult situation on his
right wing, he sent parts of his vanguard to their aid, aiming to attack the Polish
heavy cavalry from the rear. The Muscovite commander waited for the moment
when the enemy forces would get stretched thin, before launching an overwhelming attack
on the Polish-Lithuanian center. His main goal was to capture the bridge and
prevent Ostrogski from retreating across the river. The Polish heavy cavalry, although initially
successful in inflicting heavy losses on the enemy, now found themselves pressed from two
sides. Step by step their attack waned until they
finally went on the defensive. In the meantime, Ostrogski rushed with his
units to help the embattled Polish heavy cavalry, which was in a difficult situation. On the left wing, the Muscovites managed to
suppress the outnumbered Polish right. The Poles gradually retreated and it seemed
that it was only a matter of time before they would break and retreat towards the bridge
en masse. Chelyadnin’s plan succeeded. Ostrogski overstretched his lines, sending
many of his troops to bolster the wings. Now, the Muscovite commander ordered the center
forward. They advanced steadily towards the fairly
weakened Polish center. But, personally leading from the front, Hetman
Ostrogski raised the morale of the men and pushed back on the left. Mikhail Golitsa's units began a slow retreat
towards the Dnieper River, suffering heavy losses. At the same time on the right, the Polish
infantry, equipped with guns and pikes, arrived at their positions. They attacked the flank of the Muscovite left
wing from the forest, while the Polish cavalry, after a successfully performed feigned retreat,
started a counterattack. Surprised by close infantry and artillery
fire and the renewed hussar attack, Chelyadnin's left wing suffered terribly. A Many Muscovite officers fell, and panic
spread throughout the entire left wing. In the meantime, the Muscovite center finally
collided with the weakened Polish-Lithuanian center. However, the battles on the wings were by
now already decided. Ostrogski rallied his Lithuanians and now
charged into the center while leaving Sampoliński and his heavy Polish cavalry to chase the
Russian right wing. Around this time, the Muscovite left wing
fled the field, followed by the Polish right. But the bloodiest phase of the battle began
when the last reserves of Poles and Lithuanians joined in the attack on Chelyadnin's center
and rearguard. The Muscovites put up a stiff resistance,
but after a long fight and immense casualties, they eventually broke and fled. The pursuit lasted until sunset. Russian losses were enormous, with at least 13,000 perishing
during the battle and another 5,000 captured. On the other hand, the Poles reported only
500 dead, a quite unrealistic claim. Given the ferocity of the fighting, it is
likely that the losses went into the thousands. Nevertheless, the Polish-Lithuanian army inflicted
a crushing defeat on the Muscovites at Orsha. After the battle, the Polish-Lithuanian Army managed
to regain control over some of their lost fortresses. However, the well-fortified and well-supplied
Smolensk required a months-long siege. Grand Duke Vasili III could not allow this
important fortress to fall into enemy hands again, and he did everything necessary to
keep it. Despite failing to recapture Smolensk, news
of the Polish-Lithuanian victory in the Battle of Orsha spread across Europe. After defeating the Grand Duchy of Moscow,
the Holy Roman Empire and other states decided to moderate their policy towards the Kingdom
of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. However, the wars in the east continued. Vasili tried to avoid an open battle for some
time, but already in 1518 a new army was raised and the offensive was renewed to conquer another
strategic Lithuanian fortress… Polotsk.|||It's rare that you'll see Russian and 
Western media agreeing on anything, but one of the things that they can find 
common ground on is that the Ukrainian War has taken on a thoroughly international 
character as time has gone on. While the most important 
factor has no doubt been the fighting capabilities 
and spirits of both sides, it's impossible to ignore the 
international element when it comes to the materiel, economic and 
military support for Ukraine that has enabled the Ukrainian 
Armed Forces to continue fighting well beyond what their initial financial 
and materiel resources would have allowed. When I did my first video on this war, I said 
that I do not know how it's going to end. And that statement remains 
as true now as it did then. But what I remain confident in, and 
what I think the numbers make very clear, is that one of the key 
determining factors in how this conflict plays out is going 
to be political willpower in the West. It's going to be how long the Western 
economies are willing to sustain, and at what level they're willing to sustain, 
weapons and economic shipments to Ukraine. So Ukraine's allies matter, 
the economic support, the military support that they're 
able to provide really matters. And what I've done here is I've stacked 
up a list of countries who have sent military aid to Ukraine by their 
World Bank 2020 GDP figures. And you've got some real heavy hitters on this list, the United States, Germany, 
the United Kingdom, France, Italy. Some of these who have 
provided very, very significant amounts of financial aid 
or military aid, or both. And of course on that list the USA, as it 
always does, stands out as far and away the largest economy not just on this list, but also 
the largest economy in the world by many measures. America isn't the only hero of this story, 
there are certain things that it lacks. It lacks a land connection to Ukraine to 
deliver weapons and support to the country. It lacks huge stockpiles of Warsaw Pact-era 
equipment, which is the kind of stuff that Ukraine can use without a training burden, 
stuff that was produced in the Soviet Union. America throughout the Cold War was busy, quite 
rightfully, producing its own military hardware. It also lacks a colossal 
oversized axe to grind with Russia. America has a long-term rivalry with Russia, 
one that lasts throughout the entire Cold War, but it lacks the sort 
of visceral commitment to the Ukrainian conflict some 
other powers in Europe might have. And it also of course lacks 
a sense of existential threat. While Americans generally 
have been in majority support of providing support to Ukraine, of 
stopping the Russians from taking it over, few Americans would go so far as to 
say the war in Ukraine actually offers any sort of existential threat to the 
United States. Which is the kind of thing that tends to motivate a nation to go 
from assistance to fanatical support. And so in that context I'm here to say today 
that some of those other allies that I listed, despite smaller economic sizes, have really been 
critical both to how this conflict has played out and also to what happens in the future. In essence I'm here to say 
... that Poland matters. So what am I going to be covering today? I'm going to talk you through the 
history of Polish-Russian relations. I'm going to be talking about Poland's 
strategic situation and the contributions that Poland has made to the current war as one of 
Ukraine's staunchest advocates and closest allies. Then to sort of bring the point home, 
I'm going to talk about a counter-factual. I'm going to illustrate how the 
Ukraine War would have changed had Poland not provided 
the sort of support that it had. Indeed if Poland had come down, as some 
in Russia hoped, on the Russian side. We're also then going to look at 
what this means for Poland itself. What does this mean for Poland's 
military, both now and in the long term? What does this mean for 
the future of the Polish state, depending on the various ways 
that the Ukraine War might end. And also, why does this all matter? But just as we did with Finland and 
Sweden, before we jump into the today I want to start with some history. And because we're now in eastern Europe as 
opposed to up north, be prepared for a lot of tragedy. And a lot of chapters beginning with 
the words, "And then it got worse..." It's just the way Slavs do things, OK. And I'm not doing this because of some 
contention that Warsaw is doing this because it's still 
really bitter over 1772. And that getting back at 
Putin by supporting Ukraine is actually some retribution for 
the Tsar's partition of Poland. What I'm trying to say here 
is that there is a long history that provides context to 
everything that happens today. And because we're talking about Europe, 
that history stretches back centuries. So I'm going to be looking at 
Poland during the Commonwealth era, what happened with its independence, its 
period under communism and the post-Soviet era. And perhaps the best place to start is 
not with Poland in the modern sense, but with the Polish-Lithuanian 
Commonwealth, which is at its largest extent that big red blob that you 
can see on the map there. Which included most of Poland, Belarus, 
most of Ukraine, most of Lithuania, Latvia, and the territory that was 
Königsberg that became Kaliningrad. This was a major power 
in Europe for centuries. With one of its most powerful militaries, 
a relatively dynamic economy. And a system of rights and privileges 
that was ... certainly not modern, but certainly more extensive than 
what you would have expected to find either in Russia, or in most of 
Western Europe at the time. And just like Sweden, it turns out that 
being a major power in this neighbourhood almost means inevitably that you 
end up with a major rivalry with Russia. In 1610 they actually occupy 
Moscow, this is sort of the high-water mark of 
Poland-Lithuania competing with Russia. Now eventually they do leave, they go home, 
and their puppet is overthrown. But it is something of a high water mark and an 
achievement that relatively few invaders can claim. Now unfortunately for Poland it was kind of 
trying to do the EU thing before it was cool. In the sense that the Polish parliament, 
and later the individual local assemblies, were subject to something 
called liberum veto. Which is basically the idea 
that any individual member could stand up and veto any particular 
piece of legislation or major reforms. Things like taxation or other reforms that you might 
need to do things like, I don't know, defend the state. Which made the area really 
vulnerable to hybrid warfare. Something its neighbours, 
including Russia, quickly picked up. It was a relatively simple thing for example, 
to find one noble or one member who, in exchange for a significant 
bribe or influence from elsewhere, might be convinced to actively sabotage 
the operation of the Polish-Lithuanian state. Now that sounds a lot like 
modern hybrid warfare, so again: history doesn't repeat, 
but it sure does rhyme. Unanimity proved a relatively 
unworkable mechanism. And when you combined this with an elected 
monarchy, which meant that every incoming King basically sold away more 
of the powers of the executive to the parliament in exchange 
for the backing of that parliament, you have a hollowing out of the centralisation 
of the Polish state as time goes on. It's very vulnerable 
to that sort of sabotage. And the impacts are felt quite quickly. 
By 1654 something called "The Deluge" happens, this is only 40 years after the state 
was strong enough to occupy Moscow. The Deluge is a series of invasions, 
primarily by Sweden but also by Russia, that basically devastate and destroy 
and hollow out the Polish-Lithuanian state. In terms of demographic losses, it's 
something like a third of the population. Economically the damage is greater. A number of historians actually 
contend that during this period more damage is done demographically, 
economically and culturally to the state than was done to Poland 
during World War Two. If that gets you an idea of 
the magnitude of the destruction that was wrought by the Russians, 
and to an extent by the Swedes. As you might expect, after that 
sort of damage and devastation there's a long period of decline for the 
Polish and Lithuanian Commonwealth. But to the end, it's capable of 
executing feats of great brilliance. The famous Battle of Vienna where the 
Winged Hussars, which is the cavalry of Poland, some of the finest in the world at the time 
who used to wear wings on their backs, rode out to Vienna to save 
Austria from ... a Turkish invasion. That happened after The Deluge. With the right 
King, the right moment, the right motivation even after The Deluge the Polish-Lithuanian 
Commonwealth had a couple of signs of life in it. By 1772 it was basically all over. Prussia, Russia and Austria, all of 
whom had modernised to an extent, had reformed, and had 
much stronger armies. But by 1772 it's basically all over. Poland is wedged between Prussia, which 
has become a military power by the late 1700s, Russia has modernised to an extent and 
greatly built up the strength of its military, and ... Habsburg Austria (which 
you'll remember the Poles saved about a century ago at 
this point) is a major power. And between 1772 and 1795 these three powers basically shake 
hands and agree to partition Poland. Again history doesn't repeat, but it rhymes. Over three partitions, '72, '93 and '95, 
all of Poland is basically carved up and the Polish-Lithuanian 
Commonwealth, and indeed the idea of a Polish state, 
ceases to exist for a time. There is a brief revival. 
Napoleon comes in, kicks everyone around and he creates 
a puppet state, the Duchy of Warsaw. And he takes Polish troops into Russia 
and burns Moscow partly with Polish troops. But after, as we know, Napoleon loses, 
and the Duchy of Warsaw is dissolved. After that point most of Poland's territory, if not its 
population, is in what's called "Congress Poland". Congress Poland is 
basically the bit of Poland that has done to it what happened 
to Finland after Russia beat Sweden. It becomes a part of 
the Russian Empire, nominally independent, as something 
called the Kingdom of Poland. Where again the King of Poland 
is the Russian Tsar. But nominally it has its own culture, 
its own language, its own institutions, and is generally able to govern itself. And again there's a brief period 
where that basically works. And then Russia moves 
towards Russification, and really importantly for Poland, 
Russia starts to have ambitions of either converting the population 
or at least suppressing the Catholic rite. There are a couple of things that people 
around the world need to know about Poland. And one of them, and I'm not sure if this is exactly 
a secret, is to this day Poland's pretty Catholic. And if you think about how Catholic 
Poland is today, I want you to think about how Catholic Poland was 
in the fricking 19th century. This did not go down well, and 
Poland basically developed a reputation for catching on fire every couple of decades 
as they tried to throw the Russians out because the Russians decided to try 
and make them Orthodox Russians. So it might not surprise you then that come 
World War One Poland is pretty fed up. And as soon as the Russian Empire collapses, 
just like Finland, Poland "nopes" right out of there. So Poland gains its independence in 1918 
with the nominal support of the Western allies. Russia decides to come back and invade in 
1918, it doesn't take them particularly long. The Soviet Union gets its act 
together and then it invades Poland, with some ambitions, thanks to Trotsky, of 
walking all the way into Germany after Poland and securing the 
Worker's Revolution in central Europe. The Polish-Soviet War is brutal, 
absolutely brutal, in terms of the number of men 
engaged and the casualty figures. But the Poles are able to 
throw the Soviet Union back. This is where the famous 
"Miracle on the Vistula" happens. Where the Poles manage 
to break the Soviet codes. Like one famous occasion where the 
Poles jam Soviet radio communications by basically going onto 
the Russian's radio channels and just blasting bible verses at them repeatedly 
so the Russians can't talk to each other. In any case, this victory isn't 
enough to save Ukraine, who Poland is basically trying to support 
as a non-Soviet state during this conflict. But it is enough to preserve 
Poland, at least for a while. Now, time for some rhyming history. 1939, the ... Soviets are back. And this time they've agreed with the 
Germans to ... partition the Polish state. So Germany invades, 
the Soviets invade soon after, and Poland is crushed and partitioned. 
So ends the Polish state once again. Now the Soviets establish their power in 
their part of Poland in some pretty brutal ways. There are some major massacres, which 
of course they later try and blame on the Germans. World War Two then follows. The Germans 
betray the Soviets and attack the Soviet Union. All the while the holocaust comes to Poland 
with its very significant Jewish population. And then the Soviets push back 
through Poland on their way to Germany. The result is that World War Two is an absolute 
demographic and economic catastrophe for Poland. Many nations suffered very, very badly, 
but Poland suffers particularly significantly. Its demographic experience is much more akin 
to the countries of ... the western Soviet Union, as opposed to a country 
like France, for example. And of course the Soviets 
followed this up by installing a Red government, a communist 
government that rules Poland until 1989. Now because it's basically a Polish 
tradition for centuries at this point, there are a number of uprisings, protests, 
and many acts of resistance in Poland against the Red government and the wider 
Warsaw Pact system over the course of the Cold War. And the moment that the USSR collapses and the 
risk of tanks rolling across the border disappears, Poland nopes out of communism basically as 
quickly as it noped out of the Russian Empire. Now the point of going through all this 
is basically to say that there is a history of enmity and conflict between 
the Poles and the Russians. Kind of like there is between 
the Finns and the Russians. Or the Japanese and the Russians. Or the Turks and the Russians. Or indeed, the Russians and the Russians. My point is that there are some old memories here, 
and those memories fade exceptionally slowly. Polish statehood has itself been 
quashed several times over. The state and its identity 
has been a target again and again for cultural, 
religious, or political conversion. And time and time again, one of the parties 
to that particular process has been Moscow. And so we come to today, where Poland, 
rather than being under the Russian thumb, is now part of the European 
Union, it's part of NATO. Now Poland's had, shall we say, complicated 
relations with the wider EU for the last several years. But it's also critical to the European 
Union and to NATO, because it forms one of the keystone bricks in the sort of eastern 
wall that protects Central and Western Europe. It borders Russia in 
two directions essentially. Kaliningrad to the north, which is a Russian 
enclave in what used to be Königsberg which is stuffed with Russian 
military units and missile systems. And then to its immediate east and 
north east it's got Lukashenko's Belarus, which is a ... very close Russian ally, 
one would say puppet state. And a nation which allowed 
Russian troops to enter its territory in order to attack Kyiv in the opening 
stages of the Russian-Ukrainian War. And then to ... their south east it 
has a long border with Ukraine itself. Poland is in economic terms, 
as I showed at the start, it's not Germany, it's not a developed 
Western European economy, but it is one with a strong population and 
relatively high GDP growth in past years. While it remains to be seen how the current crisis 
and inflation will affect that economic growth, Poland has been generally growing faster 
than Western Europe for some time now. It's also, and this is important to the 
current crisis, home to very large numbers of Ukrainian guest workers before the 
war began, and Ukrainian refugees now. So there's a very close demographic, 
cultural and linguistic link to Ukraine. And all of this, the history and 
its current geopolitical position, means that Poland's playing for 
pretty high stakes in the Ukraine crisis. Its economy, its prosperity, all this is deeply 
intertwined with how the conflict resolves. A complete Ukrainian defeat for 
example, would put Russian forces and arguably Russian ambitions on 
the Polish border in the south east, probably in the form of some sort of puppet 
Ukrainian state under Moscow's dominion. That's something that Poland 
obviously doesn't want, especially when believe it or not, you can find 
clips on Russian TV saying that Poland should be next for "denazification" 
in the event that Ukraine is subdued. It's also a nation that faces intense 
economic implications, political implications, military implications, if the war 
in Ukraine goes the wrong way. Poland has economic links and great 
economic possibilities in Ukraine. Politically Poland has 
staked a lot on Ukraine as a potential member of the European 
Union, as a potential friend and ally. This, as well as the obvious military issue 
of potentially having a buffer state removed and Russian military forces on their border, means 
that Poland's now playing for very significant stakes. It's fair to say that Poland's got no desire to 
go back to the Warsaw Pact era, in a nutshell. And having Russian forces on their 
border with their potential ambition of further influencing their 
politics or their economy is something that Warsaw isn't 
particularly willing to play for. And as a result Poland 
has gone essentially all in when it comes to providing support 
to Ukraine during this conflict. And I focus on these stakes, because 
I think they explain a little bit about the scale that we see Poland go to in 
terms of supporting Ukraine. American support for Ukraine 
has been strong, make no mistake, but you have to imagine that public 
support and support among politicians would be just that little bit 
more frenzied and determined if Russian victory didn't mean 
Russians ending up in Kyiv, so much as Russians 
ending up in, say, Ottawa. Which is basically the equivalent ... to the 
situation the Poles now find themselves in. So let's have a little bit of a 
look at the sort of support that Poland has been 
providing in scale and scope. It's hard to match to the limited resources 
that Poland's had available to deploy. The first thing I want to talk 
about is the support for civilians. Poland has thrown its doors open to 
Ukrainian refugees literally by the millions. Those figures are very much out 
of date in the graphic to the right, ... I include them mostly 
to show the distribution. Of the millions of Ukrainians, 
overwhelmingly women, children and the very old, who have fled Ukraine since the start of the war, 
a strict majority have ended up in Poland. Poland removed all visa requirements 
and basically threw the border open to anyone who wanted to cross. They've 
given Ukrainians access to the labour market, they've given them access to humanitarian 
supports, they've given them housing assistance. In terms of scale, for ... my American listeners, think about it as basically if the 
entire population of Florida again, an entire new state of Florida, 
but bolted onto the United States, and the entire population 
was Ukrainian refugees. And when you adjust ... on a per capita 
basis, you kind of get a sense of the degree that Poland has 
provided support for refugees so far. Now this has immense 
humanitarian significance, but it's also got economic 
and military significance. Some of the great problems that Ukraine 
are dealing with right now are things like fuel shortages, energy shortages, 
difficulties with their economy. And in a situation where you're dealing 
with very intense logistical bottlenecks, that is there's a limited amount of transport 
bandwidth available to get stuff into Ukraine, being able to move these segments of the 
population into neighbouring countries where they can be sustained 
by those logistical networks, by those houses, by that 
industry and workforce. This does take some pressure off the 
Ukrainian economy at a critical time. Now because of the Ukrainian 
restrictions on men of fighting age leaving, the overwhelming majority of 
the people leaving have been children, who obviously aren't 
part of the labour force. The very old, who aren't 
part of the labour force. And the women who are supporting 
the children, who would likely have to support the children even if 
they had been back in Ukraine. So this is immensely important from a 
humanitarian perspective, it's an act of great mercy. But it's also important in 
relieving a little bit of the pressure on Ukraine's domestic 
economy during this time. And I want to stress again, 
it's hard to understand just how many people have crossed 
that border. It's hard to comprehend. Many nations in Europe and North America and 
elsewhere have had so-called "immigration crises". And all of them pale in comparison to 
the rapidity and the scale of the movement of human beings across the Ukrainian border 
into Poland and the neighbouring states. So Poland's taken in 
women, children and refugees, and it sent back a whole 
bunch of things that go boom. Poland sat on very large Warsaw Pact 
arms stocks before it went into this war, T-72 tanks and a variety of 
weapons from the Warsaw Pact era. And it has shovelled them across the 
Ukrainian border basically as fast as they will go. As of late April, they had provided about 
1.6 billion US dollars worth of weapons, which when you compare it to US support, is 
extraordinarily out of proportion with Polish GDP. The United States at that time had provided 
something like 3 billion in weapons supplies. Poland was at 1.6 but the Polish 
economy was smaller than 1/20th, it was 600 billion compared to the US 20 trillion. So the Polish effort 
was really out of all scale. And the other thing to note here 
is that a lot of these weapons, because they were older, 
cheaper, Warsaw Pact-era ones, while they didn't exactly 
run up the bill in dollar terms, they were weapons that Ukraine 
needed right at that moment. That they could put into service without training 
because they were familiar with the systems. So there was a huge amount 
of bang for the buck there. There were things that America simply 
couldn't provide because America didn't have large stocks of these 
weapon systems in hand. Poland did. And Poland was there to provide them at 
the critical juncture, and there are more on the way. So let's break this down, 
what are some of the key systems that have gone across the border 
that have made a difference so far. I'll start with armoured vehicles 
because everyone loves tanks. Now as of time of writing, Poland 
has sent more tanks to Ukraine then Ukraine is visually 
confirmed to have lost. Now I'm sure that Ukraine 
has lost many more tanks than they have visually confirmed on 
Oryx and other open source platforms. But the fact remains that Poland has been 
a major supplier of heavy armour to Ukraine. Poland had hundreds of T-72s 
in reserve at the start of this crisis, mostly this M1R variant, and they have 
been quick to ship those to Ukraine. Something like a quarter of the 
overall Polish tank force has gone. Now yes, these vehicles were 
slated for decommissioning. Yes, they were in reserve and 
not in active service any more. But they were exactly 
what the Ukrainians needed because they were vehicles 
that Ukraine was familiar with. We have seen these vehicles 
and Polish IFVs in Ukraine ... in the case of the tanks they have 
been fitted with Kontakt-1 ERA blocks. And we have visually confirmed evidence of them 
going into action on the Ukrainian battlefield. These are weapons systems that 
have not just crossed the border, they've made it all the 
way to the battlefront. At a time where we know that attrition amongst 
the Russian armoured forces is very high, and that we're seeing different sorts of 
vehicles come out of Russian reserves, this sort of number, 200+, T-72s crossing 
the border from Poland into Ukraine to bolster Ukrainian armoured strength 
is a very significant contribution. And then we've got small arms. 
And if you thought this is a section where a guy named Perun is going to shill for the 
Piorun anti-aircraft system, you're absolutely right. Poland was quick to send 
their domestically manufactured MANPADS to Ukraine 
relatively early in the conflict. This is the system you 
can see on the bottom there. And in terms of performance 
characteristics it's arguably quite superior to a lot of the Stinger missiles 
that have been sent to Ukraine. Stinger has got the fame, but 
a lot of the kills that we have seen that we have visually confirmed evidence of, 
tend to be things like Starstreak or Piorun. There are also things like the Komar 
which I put a picture up of earlier, in fact I'll flick back to that momentarily, 
the Komar ... (which is the "mosquito") is an RPG system that I'm 
showing on the bottom there. Now this thing looks like it was made 
in a garage, and quite possibly it was. It's basically a rocket on a stick 
with a basic folding metal stock. It's about as simple as 
an anti-tank weapon can get. And during the Cold War Poland shat these 
things out like there was no tomorrow. Something like 100,000 of 
these things were made. And about 25,000 they were 
still trying to sell as of 2018. I don't know how many 
they still have inventory. But it's basically a very, very basic RPG 
rocket on a stick with a folding metal stock. Now this thing has disadvantages. 
It has a very short range, it's inaccurate, and it's probably not going to be 
effective against a modern Russian tank. But it's also got advantages. You can learn to use it 
in a couple of minutes, it weighs basically nothing. It'll kill an APC or a BTR 
or a truck perfectly well. And did I mention the thing where 
they had 25,000 of them as of 2018? Those are numbers. And at a time 
when you're trying to find weapons that you can hand to TDF or militia 
units that have just been raised who have no experience with anti-tank weapons 
and they just need something right now, the Komar is a useful weapon system to have, 
and Poland was willing to provide it. It's also worth noting that Poland has 
been willing to facilitate, shall we say, or allow to take place, many private purchases 
that are being funnelled through Poland. A lot of volunteer fighters or TDF guys, who 
are having supplies brought in from overseas or are buying from international sources, 
those shipments are flowing through Poland. So even where Poland isn't 
providing the weapons first hand, they're critical logistically in terms of 
allowing those small arms to make it through. And then let's talk about things that are 
a little bit bigger, artillery and ordnance. Poland's been a key contributor in this 
category at every stage of the conflict. They were quick to supply 
ammunition. So ammunition for Warsaw Pact-era systems, 
125mm shells, 152mm shells. Those things crossed from the Polish 
border over into Ukraine very, very quickly. And then they expanded that to include air-to-air 
missiles, they are the only confirmed source of air-to-air missiles that are 
compatible with Ukraine's jets that we know for sure have 
been provided to Ukraine. They also opened pretty early with 
Warsaw Pact-era artillery systems. The 2S1, which is a 
self-propelled artillery system. The Grad, which is that very famous 
rocket system, which is where the Soviets decide to strap a pack 
of rockets to the back of a truck. It worked in World War Two with 
the Katyusha, it works as well now. And those went relatively early, but Poland's 
also been providing some more modern stuff. While America was debating, and 
Australia and others were debating, providing the M777 
155mm howitzer system, Poland's gone ahead and provided 18 of the advanced 
Krab howitzers, which I show a picture of there. This is a self-propelled version 
of an advanced 155mm gun. It's actually quite an impressive piece of kit. The hull for example, the basic hull 
is actually a South Korean form that the Poles have re-purposed 
and built into their design. But they've managed to train 100 Ukrainian 
artillery men on this vehicle already, and 18 of them are apparently 
shipped or in service. And they are due to supply 60 more 
of these things in the next few months. There was a lot of focus put on the M777 because of 
its range, its accuracy, its light weight, its mobility. Well, the Krab's got even more range. It's a much more mobile 
and survivable system, because it's self-propelled 
it can shoot and scoot. And they're supplying very large numbers 
of them, 18 already, 60 more on their way. That's comparable to the number of 
howitzers that America is providing, let alone other actors like 
say, Canada or Australia. If you wanted to be really uncharitable 
you could compare this to the shipments of Panzerhaubitzen from 
Germany or the Netherlands. But we won't go there because I think 
unpacking German arms deliveries basically requires its own 
entry and myth-busting video, because there's very loud voices on both 
extremes that are probably both wrong. But the point is Poland has certainly gone above and beyond in terms 
of providing these artillery systems. And I guess the point 
I'm trying to get here is not a who's who of every weapon system 
that Poland has been willing to provide. It's that there's a unifying 
theme here: scale and speed. Every country that has 
supplied weapons to Ukraine has gone through a different 
cycle of political debate. And then after the political 
debate and a decision being made, how long does it take for equipment 
to be delivered, to get there? And then once it's delivered, how long does it take 
to train the Ukrainians on it and get it to the front? Poland is doing all of these things in much shorter time-lines than a lot 
of what other people are able to do. Now part of that is because it's on its border, part of that is because 
it's handing over equipment the Ukrainians are either already 
trained on, or can be readily trained on. But whatever the reason, when you 
look at certain equipment categories, if you look at confirmed deliveries, Poland 
has dominated a number of those categories. 85% of known tank 
shipments to Ukraine, Poland. 40% of known IFVs, 35% of 
the known self-propelled guns. 100% of the air-to-air missiles, 
30% of the MLRS systems. ... A lot has been made about America's 
recent decision to ship HIMARS to Ukraine. As far as I can see only 4 HIMARS 
systems have already been confirmed as pre-positioned in Europe 
and ready to go to Ukraine. Poland's already provided 
20 Grad rocket systems at least, and will be making every effort 
to provide more as time goes on. OK, so it's me, so you knew I was going 
to talk about economics and logistics. But really, it's one of the key reasons (beyond weapons 
shipments) that Poland really has been critical. Despite the sinking of the Moskva and a lot of 
talk about anti-ship missiles, the fact remains the Russian Black Sea Fleet is entirely capable 
of maintaining a stand-off blockade of Odessa. That is, at the moment if anything 
comes out or goes into Ukraine, it's not going out or 
coming in by boat. It's taking the train, or it's being 
driven on the back of a truck. And that means the rail connections. 
And Ukraine had a very well developed rail system before this conflict and still does, 
capable of carrying very, very large volumes. That rail system is more 
important than ever before. So you start looking at the rail 
connections into Ukraine start thinking, "OK, if I'm trying to get 
Western military support or Western economic and humanitarian 
support in, what route is it going to take?" Well you might think you go 
via Romania into Moldova and across the border 
from Moldova into Ukraine. But the problem there is (and it's not marked 
on this map) along that Moldovan border there's an area that's packed full 
of Russian and pro-Russian troops. It's called Transnistria. It's 
essentially an unrecognised state that people were wondering 
whether or not Russia plans to link up there and 
possibly cause problems in Moldova in the event that they're eventually 
able to take Mykolaiv or Odessa. So you have to imagine that Russian troops doing 
a train inspection on something coming through, might see a bunch of Polish tanks on the back 
of the train, put two and two together and go, "Maybe, maybe we're going 
to turn this one around and not give this one permission 
to transit. Just, just, just maybe." And then you look at the other borders and you 
go OK, Hungary has a very, very narrow border, Romania likewise has 
a couple of connections. Poland stands out, and it stands out for 
more reasons than this map initially suggests. Not only are there major lines 
for Ukraine linking into Poland, there's also the matter of the railway gauge. Ukraine, as a sort of 
post-Soviet legacy, still overwhelmingly uses the 
Russian gauge of railway. That's the width of the railway track. You can't drive from different gauges, one 
to the other, using standard locomotives. Poland is home to a lot of the 
infrastructure and some of the few lines that allow trains that 
are on the Ukrainian gauge to transition over and transload 
onto the European gauge. This transloading infrastructure is present in a 
number of places on the Polish/Ukrainian border. And I've included a shot from Google 
Maps where if you squint hard enough on a big enough screen 
you can actually physically see. And the north east of 
that screen shot is Ukraine, in the south west of that screenshot 
is Poland, separated by a waterway. And you can make out the large 
transloading and railway yards and the railway lines 
linking those two together. Polish railway links are critical. And there's frenzied work going on 
in Ukraine and Poland at the moment to expand the capabilities and carrying capacity of 
these railways and of these transloading stations. Because Ukraine would very much 
like more to be able to get in. And the rest of Europe and the world 
desperate for, say, Ukrainian grain, is desperate for every ton possible to make it 
out. Which is why so much work is happening. As painful as it is right now for all those countries 
that depend on, for example, Ukrainian grain, one of the primary export 
routes, and it's not perfect but one of the few things that they've 
got going for them at the moment, is a railway link that takes it out of 
western Ukraine, ships into Poland, then north by rail through Poland, 
all the way up to Gdańsk, where it's put on shipping transports in 
the Baltic Sea and transported from there. There are other routes, 
but that gives you an example of the sort of lifelines that 
Ukraine has available to it. Without this railway infrastructure, 
without these transloading stations, without the fact that Poland has basically 
allowed NATO to set up shop in its territory and turn entire air bases, 
train stations and entire tracts of land into basically warehouses and 
coordination points that collect all of the weapons systems and 
humanitarian aid going into Ukraine and then organise their 
shipment across the border. Without all of that, the lifeline 
that is supporting the Ukrainian military and the Ukrainian economy just 
wouldn't be able to sustain itself. And it probably doesn't surprise you 
that Moscow hasn't exactly reacted warmly to Warsaw turning itself into the Amazon 
Prime of weapons deliveries to Ukraine. Russia was quick to shut the gas off in Poland, 
oil deliveries were halted in April. And you have to think that's a step that 
would be out of the question in terms of Russian relations with say Germany, or many 
of the nations of Central or Western Europe. And it's gone beyond that. Russian diplomatic 
and economic efforts to pressure Poland have been extensive basically since 
day one, and have only grown over time. And while no one likes to take Kadyrov or many 
of the people on Russian state TV seriously, when they do talk about what's next, or 
expanding the war in a universe in which they win, the country that they tend to name as next 
in line for "denazification", well it's Poland. And I want to put this into perspective here. When you look at the pain threshold of the 
various allies that Ukraine has in this conflict, and where their red lines for support seem 
to be, and what's ready to dissuade them. Some countries draw the line at too much 
inflation in energy prices, or food prices, as a line on how far they are willing 
to go for support for Ukraine. Others blanch at the idea of having their fossil 
fuel supplies cut, at least in the near term. Poland's basically said, "Do your worst." 
And that's the stance that they've taken. They are willing to take the energy 
embargo, they're willing to take just about any economic retaliation 
the Russians throw at them. And the only response has 
been more artillery, more shells, more aid, and a more open 
home for Ukrainian refugees. So why does all this matter? That's the question. Why have I decided to do 
a whole video on Poland when most coverage of the war in 
Western media barely mentions the country? My first point is that without Poland, 
Ukrainian resistance as we understand it, the war as we understand it now, a relatively slow grinding fight 
of attrition in the east of Ukraine after the defeat of the thrusts on Kyiv 
and the push back in Kharkiv, none of that's really possible 
without Polish cooperation. Western weapons deliveries have 
been important, they've been critical. And those deliveries are very difficult without 
Polish airspace, Polish rail infrastructure. Polish intelligence is another 
area that isn't discussed enough. And there's also the important 
question here of political influence. Russian strategy now appears to 
be attritional, a slow grinding fight. And in that sort of slow grinding fight, 
the only way Russia wins in the long term economically and militarily 
(I've talked about this before) is if the will of the Western 
powers supporting Ukraine falters. Because at the end of the day, 
if the political will is there, the economic and military resources 
of the West are far, far greater. So the only thing that allows 
Russia to win a war of attrition, to leverage its much 
stronger starting position, (the fact that Russia began with a much stronger 
military than Ukraine, despite its problems) the only thing that gets them to a winning 
position from there in a long drawn-out fight of attrition is if Western political will 
falters, or Ukrainian political will falters. So in terms of determining 
will Western attitudes falter, will the West drop the ball in Ukraine, 
will it decide the cost is too high, it depends how many voices are 
in the tent and what they're saying. Poland's in the tent and Poland's 
basically screaming "Go to Moscow." OK, not that extreme. If there were no 
nukes they'd be screaming "Go to Moscow." Instead they're going to be the ones in the 
room screaming "Back to the 2014 line." Or indeed they'd probably back Zelenskyy if 
he said, "Throw them out of all of the Donbas." The Poles are going to be one of the most 
persistent voices in favour of supporting Ukraine, of standing up for Ukraine, of supplying 
more weapons and more equipment. And because they're in the tent of NATO, 
because they're in the tent of the European Union, and because they're so critical to the 
eastern strategies of both those bodies, they're going to have a voice, 
they're going to have some influence. At the end of the day Washington is 
going to do what Washington does, London is going to do what London does, 
Berlin is going to do what Berlin does. But the Poles are a 
strong and persistent voice in favour of continuing 
this fight into the long term. And in the end it doesn't really matter 
for the purpose of European politics whether the Polish attitude on that point is based 
on cultural kinship with the Ukrainian people, a desire to protect Poland's own security, or just because this is a fantastic 
chance to punch the Russians in the teeth. (And are you really a Polish government if you deny 
yourself a chance to punch Russia in the teeth?) In the end that doesn't matter, what's 
going to matter is Polish advocacy and Poland's voice in terms 
of determining ongoing European and American policy 
towards this conflict. And the easy way to 
I suppose illustrate this in a somewhat ridiculous way, is to 
flip the entire example on its head. What does the conflict look like 
in Russian dreamland? And what I mean by this is that over 
the years there have been some interesting ideas come out of 
Russia in terms of Ukraine's fate. Many of them have involved the 
potential partitioning of the state. Now allegedly, and this is 
only allegedly, some years ago the Kremlin did put out soft feelers to 
Warsaw to basically determine whether, you know, Warsaw would be interested in 
some sort of partition of the Ukrainian state. Now that didn't go very well and didn't 
receive a very warm reception, allegedly. But as silly as it seems, 
the idea is worth reflecting on. Europe is a place where many countries 
still have very old clashing territorial claims. But, and this seems very obvious to say, 
the nations of Europe in general have agreed that peaceful cooperation, 
friendship, economic development, all of these things are far more important than trying to adjust or re-litigate 
questions of border disputes. They're more important than revanchism. So whereas Russia is 
all about revanchism, about denying the right of 
the Ukrainian state to exist. Describing it as an "artificial state", and trying to 
re-litigate the questions of border and identity. The Poles aren't willing to stab 
Ukraine in the back for Lviv. They're not. And I'm sure that there are some in 
Moscow who subscribe to very realpolitik, almost 19th century, views of the world in terms 
of territorial claims and revanchism and empire. I'm not sure they're going to be able to really 
understand that. But to us it's obvious. But consider for a moment 
if it wasn't obvious. A Poland that was supportive of Russia. 
A Poland that had taken a ... pro-Moscow stance. Even a Poland which had declared 
non-intervention in this crisis would have turned all of NATO's efforts, all of Europe's efforts to support 
and sustain Kyiv on its head. So basically Poland's decision not to basically do Molotov-Ribbentrop 
Pact 2.0, as ridiculous as that idea seems, that concept does allow us to illustrate just how 
critical Poland's role has been in this entire thing. That Ukraine's survival, 
Ukraine's ability to fight, basically hinges on Warsaw's 
decision to take its current path. And that path is also going to have very significant 
implications for the Polish state going forward. The first point to think about is what this 
means for Poland's military capability, because the war in Ukraine 
has touched off a very rapid spate of announcements on the 
modernisation of the Polish Army. Poland had large stocks of legacy 
equipment, Warsaw Pact-era equipment. Most that's going to Ukraine, and a lot of it is going 
to be backfilled with modern Western equipment. Tanks from Britain, tanks from 
Germany, tanks from America. And at the same time as this new 
equipment is being brought into backfill, the financial barriers against 
modernisation are being removed. In some cases it's because equipment 
is being provided to support the backfill, in other cases it's because the Polish 
government is approving additional funds. But you also have to imagine that in terms of 
NATO military aid and European military aid, Poland is going to be a priority in the 
near future because of the importance of sustaining Poland as a military flank 
against an ongoing unstable war zone. We're going to expect more NATO troops, and we have 
seen more NATO troops move into Polish territory. With that basing comes 
security assistance, with that basing comes 
additional funding assistance. So Poland's military potential is 
evolving very, very rapidly as a result. They're going to operate Patriot, 
they're going to operate F-35, they're going to operate M1A2 SEPV3 tanks, 
and they're going to operate HIMARS. And not 4 HIMARS systems, 
not 6 HIMARS systems, Poland's talking about 
ordering 500 HIMARS systems. And if they had them yesterday, they'd 
probably get lost by the Ukrainian border. And this has very real implications for the balance 
of conventional military power going forward. We talked in the video 
on Sweden and Finland about, what adding those 
nation's militaries to NATO potentially means in terms of the limited 
war scenarios between Russia and NATO. Because as I've said before, total war 
scenarios usually end up in nuclear fireballs, so it ... doesn't really make that 
much sense either to start one or to waste too much time 
and sanity talking about them. Poland's modernisation puts a more capable 
motivated force on NATO's eastern flank. They all have all of these 
advanced weapons systems. And Poland joins Finland and Sweden in terms 
of being the nations that are closely positioned and capable of intervening quickly 
in a lot of those limited war scenarios. Poland for example would be there very, 
very quickly in the event that an invasion went in against the Baltics in an attempt by 
Russia to establish a land bridge to Kaliningrad. You have to imagine that Poland 
would be there basically at the forefront. And this modernisation of Polish military 
capabilities makes it less and less likely that a Russian military, 
especially a Russian military that has been heavily depleted by the Ukrainian 
conflict, is able to conduct that sort of operation. And because they know they can't conduct 
that sort of operation, they're less tempted to try. So this is a major improvement in NATO's ability 
to dissuade limited actions by the Russians. And it also improves Poland's, 
I suppose voice at the table, their influence on matters 
of European defence. Because while they won't be 
European leaders in every area (I don't think the Polish Navy is going to win any 
prizes relative to, say, the French Navy any time soon) they're still going to have amongst 
Europe's largest tank and IFV fleets, and they're going to be a valuable 
component of NATO strategy going forward. Which is going to give Warsaw influence 
that far outstrips its economic power. So what does this mean in terms of 
wider post-war possibilities for Poland? Because as I said, the stakes are pretty high. A victorious Ukraine, that is a Ukraine that 
is able to generally resist the Russian invasion, that is able to, say, push the territorial 
boundaries back to pre-February 2022, that is able to eventually 
become an ... EU candidate and finally a full EU member, 
well what does that mean for Poland? It means Poland gains an allied state 
with a battle-tested army to the east. So Poland is no longer worried about Russian 
forces pushing against on that part of its border. Instead it's got a solid ally that's in 
the same tent, that it can train with, that it can mutually support, [that] it can rely on in 
the event of future Russian revanchist ambitions. It's also got another allied voice in the EU. Poland doesn't exactly see 
eye-to-eye with many of the western and central European nations of 
the EU, that's just a matter of record. While there are huge common values 
and common ambitions and commitments to the European project, there are at the same 
time also political, legal, cultural differences. Ukraine as a nation, which is more 
closely aligned with Poland perhaps than some of the other existing EU members, and this gives Poland a great additional 
voice and ally in the European tent. There's also an economic opportunity here, 
potentially a very large economic opportunity. Once the war is over, 
Ukraine has to be rebuilt. And presuming that EU, 
or American, or international funds are forthcoming for some sort of 
Marshall or rebuilding plan for Ukraine, you have to imagine that's going to create 
a whole raft of possibilities for Poland. For Polish construction workers 
and construction companies. For the Polish logistical network, 
for Polish workers and companies because they will be supporting 
the logistical supply chains and supporting the efforts in a devastated 
Ukraine to bring it back up to speed. And as Ukraine regenerates ... there are opportunities 
for the very closely interlinked Polish economy. And the economic potential 
of course goes beyond that. It goes to what happens if trade comes 
across the Caspian Sea into Odessa and then through Poland and into Europe. 
The possibilities are endless. At the same time, Poland in this 
scenario gains a weakened Russia. A Russia that is less able to threaten it, 
to influence its politics, to intimidate it. A Russia that is in a diminished 
position to provide a security threat. And to go further, to go to 
the most extreme example. What is a Russian defeat, an 
unambiguous Russian defeat, not that I'm saying that's going to be the result, 
but in the event there's an unambiguous Russian defeat, what does that 
mean for Lukashenko and Belarus? Now if you play the Uno reverse card 
and Ukraine solidly loses the war. And Russia is able to strip 
all the eastern territories away into what is basically 
their idea of Novorossiya. If Kyiv either becomes a technically 
neutral or a Russian-dominated state, all those benefits basically 
get turned on their head. There is no reconstruction 
economic boom. There is a Ukraine that has been 
pushed into the Russian sphere. There is a great and enlarged Russian or 
Russian-proxy military threat to the east. All of these advantages get 
flipped entirely on their head. So Poland's activism and commitment 
to the conflict makes sense through the lens of their strategy, 
their culture, their economic interests. They're playing for very significant 
possibilities that go far beyond the change that this would mean 
for say Spain, or Italy, or Portugal. European states that are supportive 
of Ukraine for political reasons, that don't have quite as much on the line 
as their Polish friends and colleagues do. So in summary. Ukraine certainly benefits from 
its wide array of supporting allies. Every dollar helps, 
every bullet helps, every shell helps. But nations have different 
levels of interest and capability, they have different dedications to the 
cause and different capacity to assist. Poland has both. Poland has the 
determination, the fanaticism of the Baltic states, with a much deeper reserve of weapons 
and equipment that it's capable of providing. So while American and British aid sort 
of dominates the anglophone media, I don't think we can forget Poland. 
It's the reason I made this video. Poland's role has 
been absolutely critical. They are the reason that Kyiv has been able 
to fight as hard as it has, as long as it has. And as far as the Poles are 
concerned, they're playing for keeps. The immense humanitarian effort 
sheltering millions of Ukrainians, could be the basis of 
goodwill and an alliance that serves Poland incredibly well 
for the next half century or more. That tightly binds Poland and Ukraine, 
that revolutionises their relationship, and allows them to become allies 
in the European tent going forward. Or it could become a costly failed investment, all 
depending on how the Ukrainian War plays out. Although I'll say that whatever happens, you 
have to imagine that for the millions of Ukrainians who have found shelter in Poland where 
they thought they had nowhere else to go, if nothing else lasts beyond 
the boundaries of this conflict I think Ukrainians will remember this. Alright, so let's do a channel update 
before we close this one out. Firstly a huge thanks. There's 
been really, really good responses to the last few videos, particularly 
the last one on corruption. The return to the longer form content 
appears to have been well received. Now, not every video, not every topic, 
is going to merit the full 50 minutes. But I've certainly taken the message home that 
where it is appropriate I'm going to speak to time rather than trying to cut myself down to 
20 or 30 minutes for the sake of popularity. I do have a number of upcoming 
videos under consideration. I'm looking at the infantry 
problem, which is the question of mobilisation and manpower 
on both sides of the conflict. And also looking at something there that 
I don't think has been dwelt on enough, which is the role of DPR/LPR proxies (so the Donetsk and Luhansk forces) 
in supporting the Russian invasion. There's a lot to be examined there in 
terms of the role those forces are playing. And how they help explain 
the dichotomy of casualty figures that we're seeing for the Russian side, and 
the experiences the Russians are having. I'm also looking at doing a 
myth-busting and propaganda video. That's been on the cards for a while, 
but it's just difficult to shape it up. The problem is there's an 
awful lot of myths out there. It takes a lot less time to generate 
a lie than it does to thoroughly rebut it. So what I'm really looking for is some guidance 
as to what myths are the most pernicious, the most common, that really deserve 
to have some time dedicated to them. Like I could focus on 
the really out there ones. Like the idea that 20,000 NATO Special Forces 
soldiers have been killed in Ukraine so far. That's a legit myth that did the rounds, 
but it's also a very niche one. So I'm interested in insight from 
people into ideas that you think deserve analysis in 
that myth-busting video. I also note that I have been 
asked for a 100 day update, basically a check in on 
how the conflict is going. I'm reluctant to do that, if only because there 
is so much uncertainty over how it's all going. And I'm not sure I want 
to step into that zone. But if there's significant 
encouragement for it, then I can do an update on 
things like the economic condition, or mobilisation, or manpower 
limitations on both sides. But in terms of analysing the battlefield, I don't 
think the information out there is good enough. And I don't think I have the capability to 
tell you how the battlefield is evolving. In any case, again I did want to 
put forward my genuine thanks for the immense support that I have 
received, it has made all the difference. I've had a huge influx of people 
sending me email content, commenting, engaging, 
I'm thankful for all of it. So please like, comment, subscribe, 
and I'll see you again shortly.|||Hi guys, @tatakodzi here. Today I would like to share NG-Poland and JS Poland 2022 highlights with you. It is 6th edition of NG-Poland conference which takes place in Warsaw (capitol city) / Poland. It brings many enthusiasts of Angular and Java Script. Which makes it also attractive for companies who actively are looking for frontend developers profiles. Due to COVID restrictions conference was held in a hybrid model enabling physical and online presence. First day sessions were focused mainly on Angular and TypeScript. Sessions which I liked the most were held by Michael, Alex, Manfred, Deborah, Emma & Minko. I also had a big pleasure watching some polish presenters like Marta or 3 amigos talking about ESLint. ngAwards 2021 went to Vitalia, House of Angular and Lars. Congrats to all and I highly recommend you to google their names. Things which I've missed on NG-Poland were lack of revolutionary topics and lack of clear session difficulty levels in agenda so you can decide on your own participation schedule. There has been some live coding sessions and the coffee breaks have been great moment for networking with the other participants. Apart from regular sessions we could listen to the discussion panel on the future of Angular framework development. As every year there have been some conference gift bags including stickers and NG-Poland t-shirts. According to the JS Poland agenda 2nd day of conference brought us topics related to Java Script, frameworks and libraries using this technology. Sessions which I liked the most were held by Michael, Nir, Stefan, Chris, Gerard and Dawid. JS AWARDS 2021 went to Chris, Stefan and Gerard. Two things which I have remembered after this conference are presentations about pandemia burnout (with family context) affecting your performance and the one about GitHub Copilot and future of AI in software development. As you may imagine there has been some crazy cats and 90's accents I would like to congratulate organisers (Darek and Julita) who despite of hard pandemic situation been able to organize this conference in a perfect way. Let me know in comments if you like this video. See you soon!|||Poland has not yet perished, So long as we still live. What the foreign force has taken from us, We shall with sabre retrieve. March, march, Dąbrowski, From Italy to Poland. Under your command We shall rejoin the nation. March, march, Dąbrowski, From Italy to Poland. Under your command We shall rejoin the nation. We'll cross the Vistula, we'll cross the Warta, We shall be Polish. Bonaparte has given us the example Of how we should prevail. March, march, Dąbrowski, From Italy to Poland. Under your command We shall rejoin the nation. March, march, Dąbrowski, From Italy to Poland. Under your command We shall rejoin the nation.|||>>> THE UNITED NATIONSEFUGEE  AGENCY ESTIMATES AROUND 660,000  UKRAINIANS HAVE SO FAR FLED TO  NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES. THE THOUSANDS HAVE BEEN ARRIVING AT A POLAND TRAIN STATION  SEEKING SAFETY FROM RUSSIA'S  INVASION, TRYING TO STAY WARM IN THE FREEZING COLD TEMPERATURES  THAT ARE IN UKRAINE RIGHT NOW. OUR CNN SENIOR CORRESPONDENT  SARA SIDNER JOINS ME NOW LIVE  FROM THE BORDER OF UKRAINE AND  POLAND. SARA, YOU'VE BEEN SHOWING THIS  REALLY REMARKABLE SCENES OF  VOLUNTEERS, PEOPLE WHO HAVE COME OUT, POLISH PEOPLE, PEOPLE FROM  GERMANY, ALL AROUND THE REGION,  TO HELP THESE UKRAINIANS WHO ARE POURING OVER THE BORDER. >> Reporter: IT IS AN INCREDIBLE SHOW OF SUPPORT, OF HUMANITY, IF YOU WILL, ANDERSON. I'LL GIVE YOU ANOTHER QUICK LOOK AT THIS. THIS IS VOLUNTEERISM AT ITS  ABSOLUTE BEST. THIS IS NOT A GOVERNMENT-LED  SITUATION. THIS IS PEOPLE WHO GOT ONLINE,  GATHERED TOGETHER. SOME OF THEM DO NOT KNOW EACH  OTHER. SOME OF THEM ARE STRANGERS, BUT  THEY HAVE BEEN HERE DAY IN AND  DAY OUT DOING JUST WHAT YOU'RE  WATCHING NOW, OFFERING FOOD,  OFFERING DRINKS, OFFERING A HOT  CUP OF COFFEE, OFFERING A HOT  SOUP, TRYING TO MAKE SURE THAT  PEOPLE FEEL WELCOME. THERE WAS EVEN A SIGN WHEN WE  FIRST GOT TO THE TRAIN STATION,  ONE OF THE VERY FIRST STOPS THAT YOU END UP AT WHEN YOU LEAVE THE BORDER OF UKRAINE INTO POLAND,  AND THERE, THERE WERE SIGNS UP  THAT SAID, UKRAINIAN, WE ARE  WAITING FOR YOU HERE IN POLAND. WELCOME TO POLAND. SO, IT IS OPEN ARMS FOR MANY  REFUGEES. I DO WANT TO GIVE YOU ANOTHER  LOOK, BECAUSE WE TALKED ABOUT  THIS EARLIER, AT SOME OF THE  OTHER THINGS THAT ARE GOING ON  HERE. SO, WHAT YOU ARE SEEING ARE  TENTS SET UP, AND YOU'VE SEEN  THIS, ANDERSON, IN THE MANY  TIMES THAT YOU HAVE REPORTED  FROM ANY KIND OF DISASTER  SITUATION, RIGHT? YOU'RE SEEING TENTS, AND THESE  TENTS HAVE BEEN SET UP. THEY HAVE BEEN SET UP SO THAT  PEOPLE CAN GET WARM, SO THAT  PEOPLE CAN SLEEP AT SOME POINT  IN TIME. LOOK AT WHAT IS -- I MEAN,  PEOPLE ARE BRINGING WHATEVER  THEY COULD MUSTER. THESE ARE THE MEAGER BELONGINGS  OF FOLKS WHO HAVE LEFT THEIR  ENTIRE LIVES BEHIND AS WE HAVE  SEEN SO MANY TIMES WHEN WAR  COMES TO A COUNTRY, WHEN  REFUGEES ARE CREATED BECAUSE  SOME GREEDY DESPOT WANTS TO TAKE SOMETHING OVER. SO, WE ARE SEEING THIS OVER AND  OVER AGAIN, AND HERE WE ARE  AGAIN, ANDERSON, IN 2022, AND  WAR IS BEING PERPETRATED ON A  PEOPLE WHO DID NOTHING TO  PROVOKE IT. ALL THEY'RE TRYING TO DO NOW IS  SURVIVE AND EVENTUALLY GO HOME. BUT THEY JUST DON'T KNOW WHEN  THAT'S GOING TO BE. >> AND THERE ARE SO MANY -- I  MEAN, THIS IS WOMEN AND CHILDREN WHO HAVE HAD A LONG JOURNEY JUST TO GET TO THAT SPOT. I MEAN, JUST GETTING OUT OF  UKRAINE FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN  IS EXTRAORDINARILY DIFFICULT. IT CAN TAKE DAYS AND DAYS AND  DAYS. TRAIN RIDES, BUS RIDES, WALKING  LONG DISTANCES IN THE FREEZING  COLD, SLEEPING OUTSIDE AT TIMES. WHEN WE CROSSED OVER FROM THE  BORDER FROM POLAND, I THINK IT  WAS YESTERDAY OR TWO DAYS -- I  GUESS YESTERDAY MORNING, I MEAN, THERE WERE HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE  WAITING. THERE WAS AN ELDERLY MAN WHO  WE'RE TOLD HAD DIED AT THE  BORDER CHECKPOINT FROM MAKING  THE JOURNEY. I DON'T KNOW IF IT WAS A HEART  ATTACK OR EXHAUSTION, BUT HE WAS COVERED WITH A TARP. IT IS JUST A CHAOTIC SCENE. I'M WONDERING, WHERE DO THE  PEOPLE GO FROM THERE? ARE UKRAINIANS ALLOWED TO, THEN, GO INTO POLAND? I KNOW THERE WAS A BUS TO TAKE  PEOPLE TO BERLIN FROM GERMAN  VOLUNTEERS. WHAT HAPPENS TO THEM FROM HERE? >> Reporter: I'M GLAD YOU ASKED. LET ME COME OVER HERE AND SEE IF I CAN GET YOU A PICTURE. THE BUSES FOR THE MOST PART HAVE JUST LEFT, BUT IF YOU LOOK JUST  BEHIND ME, YOU'LL SEE, LIKE, A  TRUCK PULLING UP. PEOPLE ARE LITERALLY COMING FROM THEIR HOMES. PEOPLE IN POLAND ARE SAYING,  HEY, DO YOU NEED A RIDE? DO YOU NEED A RIDE TO KRAKOW? DO YOU NEED A RIDE HERE? DO YOU WANT TO COME TO MY HOME  AND STAY WITH ME? THAT'S HAPPENING IN THIS  COUNTRY, SO YES, UKRAINIANS ARE  BEING OFFERED A PLACE TO STAY IN PEOPLE'S HOMES, AND THE  GOVERNMENT IS SAYING, HEY, YOU  CAN COME IN. THEY ARE -- THEY AREN'T EVEN, AT SOME POINTS, CHECKING PAPERS,  AND THEY'RE ALLOWING NOW  CHILDREN ON THEIR OWN TO BE ABLE TO COME OUT OF UKRAINE AND INTO  POLAND, AND YOU JUST TALKED  ABOUT WHAT YOU SAW ON THE  BORDER, AND WE SAW SOMETHING  VERY SIMILAR, WHICH IS  HEARTBREAKING. WE SAW A 15-YEAR-OLD GIRL WHO  SAYS SHE HAD JUST CROSSED OVER  FROM UKRAINE BY HERSELF TO MEET  HER MOTHER WHO HAD COME FROM, I  THINK, BELGIUM, AND SO SHE HAD  SHOWED UP FROM BELGIUM TO MEET  HER DAUGHTER, AND ALL OF A  SUDDEN, I LOOK OVER, AND THE  MOTHER HAS FAINTED. NO PULSE. SHE HAD NO -- SHE WASN'T  BREATHING. THERE ARE MEDICS THERE FROM  ISRAEL WHO HAD SHOWN UP TO  VOLUNTEER FROM AN ORGANIZATION  THAT'S SIMILAR TO DOCTORS  WITHOUT BORDERS CALLED RESCUERS  WITHOUT BORDERS, AND THEY WERE  LITERALLY WORKING ON THIS WOMAN  ON THE FREEZING COLD GROUND AND  TRYING TO REVIVE HER. AND BY GOD'S GRACE, SHE WAS  REVIVED. THE MEDICS GOT HER BREATHING  AGAIN. SHE HAD A VERY LIGHT PULSE, BUT  THE DAUGHTER IS STANDING THERE  AND WONDERING WHAT SHE'S  SUPPOSED TO DO. YOU CAN SEE THE PANIC AND THE  HEARTACHE, AND SHE'S CRYING AND  TALKING ON THE PHONE, TRYING TO  FIGURE OUT WHAT TO DO NOW  BECAUSE THEY'RE TAKING HER  MOTHER TO THE HOSPITAL. AN AMBULANCE CAME ABOUT 30  MINUTES LATER, AND THE  DAUGHTER'S STANDING THERE,  GOING, I DON'T KNOW WHAT TO DO. WHAT DO I DO? MY MOTHER -- I WANT TO GO HOME. SO, IT'S A REALLY, REALLY,|||so kyle is currently in line to   try to see if we can fix his whole boarding 
pass passport not matching issue i'm really   really hoping i'm not gonna lie i've been 
super stressed about this i've just felt   like an elephant on my chest really hoping 
that we're able to be on the flight and leave hey guys we're kyle and maddie and we graduated 
college in december of 2021. after working hard   to pay off our student loans and save money we've 
started traveling the world full time there's just   one thing we're attempting to do it on 60 a day 
as a couple while that may seem small we know   that we can have an amazing time as well as keep 
our costs at a minimum stick around to see how we   adapt to full-time travel and maneuver our tiny 
budget to have some experiences of a lifetime we are officially starting our one year of travel 
which is insane i we're in the airport and i don't   i still don't think it's even hit me yeah it 
doesn't feel real yet that we're leaving but   we just said our final goodbye to maddie's mom 
and grandma and we made it through security with   a little issue with my name 
being mistyped on my ticket but   they let us through so hopefully they let us on 
the plane hopefully we're not foreshadowing here   yep hopefully there's no issues with that 
yeah we are going to find the lounge right now   there's only one lounge i think in this 
terminal so we're gonna have to go find it all right we're currently sitting in the lathanza 
business class lounge maddie's trying to figure   out some stuff with my name being messed up 
on my ticket it had my middle name and my   first name pushed together so uh security led us 
through but we're nervous about boarding the plane   with it i'm really stressed about it i'm gonna 
be so upset if we get stuck in chicago tonight all right flight boards in 10 minutes 
so we're gonna head to the gate   hopefully everything goes good we can just 
get on the plane if you guys didn't just   hear that the lady at the desk told us to 
have a great flight and maddie said you too   all right so we landed in chicago and we 
had to walk into the international terminal   we tried to go to a lounge but it was full 
so now we're just waiting in our gate but   we have to wait here for like two more 
hours until we board the flight of warsaw growing rest all right so kyle is currently 
in line to try to see if we can fix his whole   boarding pass passport not matching issue   i'm really really hoping i'm not gonna lie 
i've been super stressed about this i've just   felt like i've had like an elephant on my chest 
the entire time that we've been in chicago i'm   i just really am hoping that we can get something 
going here and that we're able to be on the flight actually oh i literally we brought the stewardess a goodie bag with 
candy in the milk and they gave us champagne   my whole world temperature is 30 degrees celsius please 
remain seated with your single faucet until we made it to warsaw our airline flight 
attendants we're the best people ever i   feel like they're all like my new best friends now 
i love them also if you're all watching this hello   thank you so much for all you do they're seriously 
so amazing yes they were the best but we are   really rushing to go through customs because 
we only have like 40 minutes until our flight all right so customs took like 
five minutes nothing at all   security took maybe like 15 would you say   and we made it to our gate perfectly on time we're 
actually starting to board right now so time to go all right we are finally in krakow we have like 
a little bit of a list of things we need to do   first we need to find atm to get money out and 
two we need to figure out public transportation   and how to get to our airbnb so it's kind 
of like our steps now which is super nice   should take us like 40 minutes 
to get to work so not too bad   all right we're on the bus now for a 60 minute 
ride ticket it was six i think polish zloty and   that's like a dollar 25 usd right we got off the 
train and now we are heading towards our airbnb   maddie has service so we're using google 
maps it was like a four minute walk from   the train station so we should be there soon 
all right we have finally made it to our airbnb   after what like a 20-hour day of travel 
yeah i think it was about 20 hours but it   was long but the time change coming over to 
europe always just kills us it does like it   so it's 6 p.m here right now but it's noon 
at home so we're really tired so we didn't   get much sleep last night but yep we're still not 
gonna be tired to go to bed just because it'll be   yup so we're just gonna relax get something to 
eat and hopefully get some good sleep right to   prepare for our big day of exploring and with all 
that being said we will see you guys tomorrow you|||hello guys welcome to another vlog so 
today i'm going on a road trip to Toruń  i came from wroclaw  by train to Bydgoscz  
and from Bydgoscz  we're driving to Toruń  and   yeah so come along with me let's explore 
Toruń  uh another thing that happened   to me was yesterday was friday the 13th 
so the forces of friday the 13th were on   i bought the tickets i tried i forgot to buy 
the tickets earlier and when i decided to buy   the tickets uh there were no available seats but 
you could still pay to stand literally so i paid   and i rushed this morning to the train station 
and when i got there i just entered any wagon and   i sat down on a particular chair and i was just 
hoping that this person doesn't come but i stayed   for a couple of minutes and then the controller 
who checks the tickets came and he had to ask for   my ticket so when i showed him he said no this is 
first class you're not supposed to be first class   so from there i had to be transferred to i had to 
move by myself anyway i kept on moving looking for   seats it was just a rough ride to be very honest 
with you so make sure you book your tickets ahead   of time do not be like me but for now let's drive 
to toronto i think from because the run is about   50 kilometers so this drive should take us like 
one hour approximately give or take uh yeah everything feels so abstract yeah it's complicated   what you say the way you act well 
it makes me so confused i don't know   what to do tauren is located in the north central 
part of poland it has its nicknames as the   gingerbread city or the copernicus down and you're 
going to find out why so our first stop today is   at the sanctuary of the blessed virgin mary and 
let's have a look and see what it looks like okay so now we're going to park palmy naruto so 
national memory park the national memory park   or the national remembrance park was opened in 
honor of those who risked their lives to save the   jews in poland during the second world war and on 
every tab we have the inscription of their names okay so basically here we have sons of 
our homeland you can see the names of   the different people who have been remembered 
in this park like i said every single pillar has   names inscribed here and let's go to 
the middle and have a look from there   i feel like at this point i need to 
be playing like the polish anthem so over here we have pictures 
from the second world war so basically that's what the pack of memory is up next we're going to explore the city of 
turin and would start from the universities   here in turin so first of all we are at 
wsg so there's a campus here in tehran   for their architecture and nursing so 
right now i'm at the nursing campus so let's go inside and have a look and see what 
is done here so they recently started out their   nursing program in english so let's 
go inside and see what it's like   wsg university recently started its nursing 
degree in english where students get   taught all the modules and with over 2 
300 hours of hospital practice to make   sure that the end of the day a graduate 
of nursing from this university becomes   a well-rounded nurse and is ready to take on the 
world as this degree is internationally recognized what's your weakness the next school we are 
heading to is the ncu so this is the nicolas   copernicus university that's in english 
language and of course in polish this   is universitat michael wire corpenicar so this 
universities is one of the biggest universities   here in toront and it offers courses from 
chemistry nursing medicine pharmacy management   and all other courses the university campus is 
huge as you can see so i'm just going to show   you around because of course i can't get inside 
because i do not have access to this university   like other cities the tram and the buses is 
the mode of transportation in turin so up next   we're headed for the next university 
which is wsb university here in turn   as you can see there is a lot of plantation 
a lot of trees so the air here is fresh   i like the city as well so let's just keep 
going okay so now we are at vishaskova   bankovi so this is wsb tauren 
so this is the toronto campus   and there we have it of course i don't have access 
to going to the universities so we're showing you   what it looks like on the outside with a lot of 
university comes a lot of students tehran is a   student city and in this city of course we have 
student jobs available to students to work so i   was able to check out the prices of dormitories in 
the city and it's within 520 to 700 000 per month   depending on the kind of room that you're looking 
to get of course there are also companies here in   toronto opening up we have some i.t companies 
and we have other companies so up next we're   headed to the city center the old town this is 
where we are going to explore next so let's go okay so now of course we are in 
old town so i headed for venac so this is what the season looks like everything well it makes me so confused i 
don't know what to do anymore is known as copernicus town because this 
is where the astronomer nicolas copernicus   was born now nicolas copernicus is the guy that 
proposed that all the planets were in orbit around   the sun so if you do not know this i think you 
should go back to study physics okay i'm joking   so yeah my god guys the temperature is so hot like 
so so hot but we move so i got these postcards   as always for my postcard collection so here we 
go i'm heading into one of the gingerbread spots jiren is famous for chirinski 
bernicki so this is the turian   gingerbread they even have a museum 
for the gingerbread can you imagine   so in almost every corner here in the city center 
we have a shop where they sell piraneki so this   is like this is gingerbread so taronski 
gingerbread so the gingerbread from tauren   so that's what thorin is known for they produce 
a lot of gingerbread and i got myself a lot of so gingerbread yeah it's complicated what 
you say so we're headed for vistula river   apparently we have a vistula festival going 
on there so let's go and see what it's about oh basically this was how it looked 
in the old this is how it looks now   and this is it although i don't have a full 
view of this because if you want to get this you   need to go all the way to the other side of the 
river which i clearly cannot go to right now but i think you want it too hurts to oh you smile like a dagger hit me okay so we have this church right around the 
corner here in the city center where nicolas   copernicus was christian so this 
was where he had this christian in   so now we are going into the church so so this was when nicolas go by nick was baptized so apparently this is a dragon and we are 
at smok taronski and if you remember from   the krakow vlog we had smok krakowski so 
this is the dragon of thuron and according   to them on the 13th of 1746 which apparently 
yesterday was 13th of august a soldier's wife   and a carpenter's wife said they saw a dragon 
in toronto so here we go here is the dragon so guys my battery is about to die but let's keep 
it going i hope that i'm able to still capture   part of the city before this battery goes 
off and i'll be headed back to brazil   in exactly two hours so let's see what we can 
do with the remaining 10 percent of this battery   okay so now we are going to the castle of ruins 
and uh it starts here yeah starts here and it   goes all the way down there so let's go okay 
so this is part of the castle as you can see   part of the wall that still remains it's rains 
this is what it is there is another building right   beside it which was also made of brick so it looks 
as if it's the same but it isn't this is the main   one and we also have some broken pieces of bricks 
there so part of the castle that was destroyed so we have the river still flowing through here this is all part of the ruins they've of 
course built other things around it but   it's this used to be the castle you have a football pitch down the side of the first of them this is all part of its part of the castle this is the whole turn yeah so still the rain castle and vistula rivers outside there over there i'll discuss some life's endurance so now obviously someone has built a casino 
inside the castle still here marine castle back in the day there was a magazine column 
which was for a cartoon character called   professor felutak and he had a friendly dog 
called phyllis and now we have the monument of   phyllis sitting in the city center 
so this is a dog with a hat and an   umbrella and you would hardly 
miss it in the old town so guys i'm back in bit gosh and i 
am here if you remember from the big   vlog i would show you shortly so when i first 
came i took a picture here and here as well   but there was no water in this fountain 
because it was winter and of course there   wasn't water it was cold so now it's summer 
and this is what it looks like in summer so now it's time to go thank you for 
watching the vlog do not forget to like   share subscribe and i'll see 
you guys in the next one bye|||Kielce Kielce is the capital of the Świętokrzyskie province in the southeast of Poland, located about 180 km south of the capital Warsaw. Kielce is on the list of the cities of Poland on the seventeenth place with about 200,000 inhabitants.|||Over the years I've been making videos, a lot of people have got in touch
to tell me that in Warsaw, in Poland, the tap water quality is tested
and controlled by clams. They said that the city constantly runs a sample of its tap water
past some mollusks. And those are filter feeders,
so if there's a contaminant in the water, they will instinctively close. Sensors attached to them
will detect that and raise the alarm. And I didn't believe it. It seemed too weird to me. And all the articles that I could find
about it seemed dodgy, somehow. They just set off red flags
in the research parts of my brain. There is a very arty Polish documentary
about the system, and a lot of sites repost that film’s claims
without even mentioning the source, just as a “look at this
funny thing off in Poland!”. It felt like it could be a misinterpreted
or mistranslated joke, or even a deliberate hoax by a filmmaker
that got out of control, and that the English speaking world was just believing it
because it was quirky and harmless enough. There have been plenty of fake
things like that spread about in the past, accidentally or otherwise. Or maybe the clam-sensors did exist,
but it was a brief experiment that never went anywhere. Well, I'm now here in Warsaw,
on a famous building in the middle of the river, with a Polish
speaking team showing me around. There is a lot of stuff we are not allowed
to film here for security reasons. Inside here is critical infrastructure. Plus, it is far too noisy down there
for me to talk, but I'm happy to report that yes,
the clams are real. They actually do protect Warsaw, but the story's a little more
complicated than that. IN POLISH: The important thing is: those clams aren't
the only protection. They're not even the main part. This is still a modern
water treatment system, with 21st century sensors and
detectors to keep everyone safe. This is part of a defense in depth,
one part of an early warning system, one more alarm that can go off, like an airport that uses
explosive sniffing dogs... but also electronic detectors. The technical term
for this is “biomonitoring”, and it turns out from more research that
this isn't the only place that does it. There are other water companies in Poland
that have similar setups, plus one in Minnesota, USA,
and probably more that I haven't found. At which point I think I can say that:
yes, the red flag in my head was wrong. The clams in this building
really do help protect Warsaw.|||AMNA NAWAZ: A wave of hostility towards LGBTQ
people in Poland has alarmed officials and led the American ambassador there to denounce
conservative Polish newspapers for stoking hatred in its campaign for so-called LGBT-free
zones. Those fears were realized this weekend, as
a mob of right-wing Poles attacked a Pride March in the town of Bialystok, one of several
districts that have declared themselves to be LGBT-free. From Bialystok in Eastern Poland, special
correspondent Malcolm Brabant reports. MALCOLM BRABANT: "God, honor, motherland,"
they chanted. Wearing obscene anti-gay T-shirts, some hard-core
right-wingers were intent on violence. Following their lead, thousands of people
from Bialystok, including senior citizens, lambasted marchers protesting against the
sudden rise of so-called LGBT-free zones. Among those they tried to intimidate, Malgorzata
Mroz. MALGORZATA MROZ, LGBTQ Activist (through translator):
It makes me sad that people claim those LGBTQ-free zones in Poland, because me, as a bisexual
and also Polish person, I would really love to feel welcome in every single place in this
country. MALCOLM BRABANT: The marchers were vastly
outnumbered, and police protection was essential. Gay activists claim they have replaced refugees
as Poland's main hate figures. MALGORZATA MROZ: I am scared a bit. I have tear gas with me. So, yes, as you can see, they basically shout
"Get the (EXPLETIVE DELETED) out of here" to me and to other people like me. So I can't feel welcome in my country. MALCOLM BRABANT: As the hostile mood intensified,
the police struggled to defend stragglers separated from the main march. The mob set off in pursuit of one small group
of gay pride campaigners seeking safety. But they spotted police pinning down a hard-liner,
and the first skirmish of the afternoon began. Police arrested 30 people. This exemplified the hatred and intolerance
that concerns the U.S. ambassador and the openly gay deputy mayor of Warsaw, who compared
it to the behavior of the Nazis in the Second World War. The issue of gay rights has been bubbling
beneath the surface in Poland for years. But, recently, it's just exploded and gone
to the forefront of the political agenda. And this issue has placed Poland into conflict
with mainstream Europe. When Poland's populist Law and Justice Party
came to power in 2015, it declared ambitions to Christianize the European Union. In towns like Bialystok, they abhor what they
regard as mainstream Europe's decadent values. At Parliament in Warsaw, influential law and
justice politician Zdzislaw Krasnodebski said Europe favored constitutions, but was hypocritical
when it came to Poland. ZDZISLAW KRASNODEBSKI, European Parliament
Member: Our Constitution in the Article 18 states the marriage is only between a man
and a woman. For me, it's very interesting that, in this
case, there's no interest in what actually our constitution is talking about. MALCOLM BRABANT: Government critics say such
arguments have emboldened protesters, like Lukasz Marcinkiewicz, who is studying medicine
in Bialystok. LUKASZ MARCINKIEWICZ, Medical Student: It
makes me sad when I see a situation where we have two people, two men together or two
women together, and they declare love for each other. There is no biological possibility for them
to have a child. So I realize that this is not what families
should look like. I strongly support the model where there is
one woman, one man, and babies. KAMIL SIENICKI, All Poland Youth Movement
(through translator): We think that LGBTQ movements have a very long tradition of profanity
towards state symbols. They turned Poland's national red-and-white
flag into a white rainbow flag and desecrate Catholic and Christian symbols. MALCOLM BRABANT: He has in his sights Daniel
Rycharski, an artist who wears prayer beads made of the blood of homosexuals and who portrays
saints as gay icons. DANIEL RYCHARSKI, Artist (through translator):
What is going on around the LGBT community appalls me, the fact that the governing party
uses us as electoral fuel, because of the fact that the government works closely with
the church, and the church is its authority. The Catholic Church's teaching says it explicitly. You could say it has incited hatred against
LGBT people. MALCOLM BRABANT: The anti-gay sermons of some
priests are frequently rabid. Wieslaw Dawidowski, who leads Poland's Order
of Saint Augustine is a man of peace. But, on this issue, he says he's neither moderate
nor liberal. FATHER WIESLAW DAWIDOWSKI, Order of Saint
Augustine: I would quote Pope Francis. And I would say, here, I'm not a judge. And I cannot judge people. If people want to live this way of live, all
right, they live this way of life with full consequences. MALCOLM BRABANT: Thirty miles away from Bialystok
is rustic, God-fearing Kulesze Koscielne, where 90 percent voted for the ruling party. ELZBIETA MIERZWINSKA, Poland (through translator):
What's new isn't always good. And Poland always stood firmly on tradition,
religion, right? KAZIMIERZ TRZASKA, Poland (through translator):
I would find some remote islands. I would take gay men to one island and lesbians
to the other. Let them live there. MALCOLM BRABANT: Still inspired by the conservative
vision of the late Polish Pope John Paul II, the Catholic Church is engaged in a battle
for Europe's identity. FATHER WIESLAW DAWIDOWSKI: This is a certain
pivotal moment in our relationship. I think the old Europe, which is called the
old lady, which is a dying Europe, by the way, has to redefine what she really wants. And it's the question of the Brussels elites. It is also the question of the church elites. What is this we want in Europe in the future,
the issues that concern human values? MALCOLM BRABANT: "Freedom, equality and tolerance,'
chanted the pride marchers. They yearn for the right to have same-sex
marriages. But given the levels of prejudice in Poland
right now, that looks like an impossible dream. For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Malcolm Brabant
in Bialystok.|||Hello and welcome to Poland. My name is
Paweł and let's start another episode of 3P and today we will talk about
Polish names For most of the time children in Poland
were given names of Saints. As Poland is very religious country most of parents
were baptizing their children and even the communist period that members of
party baptized their children. So name in Poland is very important and meaningful
and you also got your Saint patron. There are many names which are easy to
translate like for example mine. Pawel in English is Paul, Marek is Mark. Some
sounds not too similar like for example Jerzy is English
George. But sometimes they are almost the same like Adam. But there are also some
names which are typically Polish. For example Stanisław. Stanisław was a bishop
of Krakow in 1000 and in 1079 after argue with the King
he was killed. Some would say: he was murdered, some would say that he was
executed by the King. But then the legend says that his body
was hacked into pieces then they threw it into a pool but miraculously it were
integrated and he became a saint patron of Poland. Today
I would say that in almost every Polish family you can find someone with that
name. In United States where there is a big Polish community you can find a lot
of churches which are dedicated to st. Stanisław.   St. Wojciech the first Polish saint.
His name is not translating into English in some older documents like for example
baptismal records you can find it as Adalbertus. Have you ever heard it?
Of course not. No one is using that name When Wojciech was emigrating from
Poland sometimes his name was changed into Albert sometimes into a George. There are many names which are like tongue twister. For example Grzegorz, Krzysztof,Przemysław, Katarzyna or you can try Zdzisław. Now it's your turn. Here we're in the medieval
Dominicans monastery. They are in Krakow thanks to Saint Jacek. Jacek is
another Polish name what is not translating well into English. Hiacynt - I don't think it sounds well. Jacek is also the only Polish Saint whose
statue you can find in a st. Peter's Square in Vatican. But when he came to
Krakow in 1200 when he started organizing the monastery he first built
the refectory what is a dining room. Then there was a church. Sso we can say what
was the most important food or the prayer. They've started from food and even
nowadays it's used by around 100 monks who are still living here. But Saint
Jacek is also a saint patron of pierogi. Pierogi probably the most famous polish
dish. And we have Saint patrons for almost everything in Poland but about
that we'll talk in another episode. Everyone called my grandmother Maria but
especially in 1800 and 1900 priests didn't want to give that
name dedicated to God's Mother as a to Saint name to girls. So they were
baptized as Marianna and it can be a bit confusing when in different documents
your name is mixed. Like my grandmother she had documents with Maria and some
with Marianna. Adam Mickiewicz about a kid we
would say little Adaś. We are by the statue of that great poet and you
can remember it from the last episode when we've met on the Main Square in
Krakow. Adam Mickiewicz by the way never been to Krakow. But he created and
named Grażyna. Grażyna was a very, very common name in generation of my
parents. But priests when they were asked to baptize a girl with that name: they
said not really because there is no saint like that.  And they gave the name
Maria. Little Grażyna was finding her real name Maria in her ID when she got
first real documents. What would be life without parting. If you want to
remember birthdays of all your friends it can be quite hard. But in Poland
especially here on the South is much easier when you are bringing presents
gifts flowers to your friends for their name day. Name day is the day when we are
celebrating a saint patron. And a lot of people in Poland can remember some dates
of the most famous Saints. Like for example Barbara - December 4th,
st. Nicholas - December 6th, December 24th it's Adam and Eve. And then ladies
selling flowers here on the main square are bringing them to the statue of Adam
Mickiewicz. The last thing what I want to tell
you about Polish names is: that if you take our ID you will find a family name
and two given names. Most of us officially are using two names. And if
you know translation of your name into Polish please leave it in a comment. And
the Polish word for today is Imię, Imię its name in Polish. Thank you for
watching. Please remember to subscribe and turn on notifications and see you in
the next episode. Bye|||SERIES OF RUSSIAN
MISSILE STRIKES INSIDE
UKRAINE. MISSILE STRIKES INSIDE
UKRAINE.
RICHARD ENGLE HAS LATE UKRAINE.
RICHARD ENGLE HAS LATE
DETAILS. RICHARD ENGLE HAS LATE
DETAILS.
>> Reporter: RUSSIA'S DETAILS.
>> Reporter: RUSSIA'S
WRATH AFTER A PUBLIC >> Reporter: RUSSIA'S
WRATH AFTER A PUBLIC
HUMILIATION FOLLOWING WRATH AFTER A PUBLIC
HUMILIATION FOLLOWING
UKRAINE'S SUCCESS HUMILIATION FOLLOWING
UKRAINE'S SUCCESS
TAKING BACK KHERSON, A UKRAINE'S SUCCESS
TAKING BACK KHERSON, A
WAVE OF AIRSTRIKES TAKING BACK KHERSON, A
WAVE OF AIRSTRIKES
TONIGHT, ONE HITTING WAVE OF AIRSTRIKES
TONIGHT, ONE HITTING
THIS RESIDENTIAL TONIGHT, ONE HITTING
THIS RESIDENTIAL
BUILDING IN KYIV AND THIS RESIDENTIAL
BUILDING IN KYIV AND
CAUSING ALARM REPORTS BUILDING IN KYIV AND
CAUSING ALARM REPORTS
THERE WAS A POSSIBLE CAUSING ALARM REPORTS
THERE WAS A POSSIBLE
RUSSIAN STRIKE ACROSS THERE WAS A POSSIBLE
RUSSIAN STRIKE ACROSS
THE POLISH BORDER, RUSSIAN STRIKE ACROSS
THE POLISH BORDER,
THOUGH NO THE POLISH BORDER,
THOUGH NO
CONFIRMATION. THOUGH NO
CONFIRMATION.
THE POLISH GOVERNMENT CONFIRMATION.
THE POLISH GOVERNMENT
SAYS IT'S THE POLISH GOVERNMENT
SAYS IT'S
INVESTIGATING AN SAYS IT'S
INVESTIGATING AN
EXPLOSION THAT KILLED INVESTIGATING AN
EXPLOSION THAT KILLED
TWO PEOPLE. EXPLOSION THAT KILLED
TWO PEOPLE.
POLAND IS A MEMBER OF TWO PEOPLE.
POLAND IS A MEMBER OF
NATO AND THE POLISH POLAND IS A MEMBER OF
NATO AND THE POLISH
NATIONAL SECURITY NATO AND THE POLISH
NATIONAL SECURITY
COUNCIL HAS CALLED AN NATIONAL SECURITY
COUNCIL HAS CALLED AN
EMERGENCY MEETING. COUNCIL HAS CALLED AN
EMERGENCY MEETING.
RUSSIA DENIED ANY EMERGENCY MEETING.
RUSSIA DENIED ANY
INVOLVEMENT IN MISSILE RUSSIA DENIED ANY
INVOLVEMENT IN MISSILE
STRIKES NEAR THE PILL INVOLVEMENT IN MISSILE
STRIKES NEAR THE PILL
POLISH BORDER AND STRIKES NEAR THE PILL
POLISH BORDER AND
TONIGHT THIS FROM THE POLISH BORDER AND
TONIGHT THIS FROM THE
STATE DEPARTMENT. TONIGHT THIS FROM THE
STATE DEPARTMENT.
>> WE CAN'T CONFIRM STATE DEPARTMENT.
>> WE CAN'T CONFIRM
THE REPORTS OR DETAILS >> WE CAN'T CONFIRM
THE REPORTS OR DETAILS
AT THIS TIME. THE REPORTS OR DETAILS
AT THIS TIME.
>> Reporter: IN AT THIS TIME.
>> Reporter: IN
UKRAINE/RUSSIA >> Reporter: IN
UKRAINE/RUSSIA
TARGETED POWER UKRAINE/RUSSIA
TARGETED POWER
FACILITIES AND CAUSED TARGETED POWER
FACILITIES AND CAUSED
WIDESPREAD BLACKOUTS. FACILITIES AND CAUSED
WIDESPREAD BLACKOUTS.
RUSSIA FIRED ROUGHLY WIDESPREAD BLACKOUTS.
RUSSIA FIRED ROUGHLY
100 MISSILES ACROSS RUSSIA FIRED ROUGHLY
100 MISSILES ACROSS
SIX REGIONS IN AN 100 MISSILES ACROSS
SIX REGIONS IN AN
APPARENT COORDINATED SIX REGIONS IN AN
APPARENT COORDINATED
STRIKE ON APPARENT COORDINATED
STRIKE ON
INFRASTRUCTURE. STRIKE ON
INFRASTRUCTURE.
UKRAINE'S PRESIDENT INFRASTRUCTURE.
UKRAINE'S PRESIDENT
ZELENSKYY SHAKING HIS UKRAINE'S PRESIDENT
ZELENSKYY SHAKING HIS
FIST AND VOWING WE ZELENSKYY SHAKING HIS
FIST AND VOWING WE
WILL SURVIVE FIST AND VOWING WE
WILL SURVIVE
EVERYTHING. WILL SURVIVE
EVERYTHING.
IN KHERSON THE PRICE EVERYTHING.
IN KHERSON THE PRICE
OF VICTORY IS NOW IN KHERSON THE PRICE
OF VICTORY IS NOW
BREAD LINES IN A CITY OF VICTORY IS NOW
BREAD LINES IN A CITY
UKRAINE SAYS THE BREAD LINES IN A CITY
UKRAINE SAYS THE
RUSSIANS DELIBERATELY UKRAINE SAYS THE
RUSSIANS DELIBERATELY
DAMAGED. RUSSIANS DELIBERATELY
DAMAGED.
NO POWER, NO WATER. DAMAGED.
NO POWER, NO WATER.
BUT IT'S BEING NO POWER, NO WATER.
BUT IT'S BEING
REPAIRED QUICKLY. BUT IT'S BEING
REPAIRED QUICKLY.
AND SPIRITS ARE HIGH. REPAIRED QUICKLY.
AND SPIRITS ARE HIGH.
DANIEL, A COMMANDO, AND SPIRITS ARE HIGH.
DANIEL, A COMMANDO,
WAS ONE OF THE FIRST DANIEL, A COMMANDO,
WAS ONE OF THE FIRST
TROOPS TO PLANT THE WAS ONE OF THE FIRST
TROOPS TO PLANT THE
UKRAINIAN FLAG BACK TROOPS TO PLANT THE
UKRAINIAN FLAG BACK
HERE AND HE IS STILL UKRAINIAN FLAG BACK
HERE AND HE IS STILL
FIGHTING. HERE AND HE IS STILL
FIGHTING.
DO YOU THINK THE FIGHTING.
DO YOU THINK THE
RUSSIANS ARE GOING TO DO YOU THINK THE
RUSSIANS ARE GOING TO
COME BACK? RUSSIANS ARE GOING TO
COME BACK?
>> THEY DON'T HAVE COME BACK?
>> THEY DON'T HAVE
ENOUGH GUN POW IR. >> THEY DON'T HAVE
ENOUGH GUN POW IR.
THEY DON'T HAVE POWER ENOUGH GUN POW IR.
THEY DON'T HAVE POWER
AT ALL. THEY DON'T HAVE POWER
AT ALL.
WHATEVER THEY ARE AT ALL.
WHATEVER THEY ARE
PLANNING, THEY WILL BE WHATEVER THEY ARE
PLANNING, THEY WILL BE
CRUSHED. PLANNING, THEY WILL BE
CRUSHED.
>> Reporter: AS RUSSIA CRUSHED.
>> Reporter: AS RUSSIA
RENEWS LONG-RANGE >> Reporter: AS RUSSIA
RENEWS LONG-RANGE
STRIKES UKRAINIAN RENEWS LONG-RANGE
STRIKES UKRAINIAN
FORCES ARE TRYING TO STRIKES UKRAINIAN
FORCES ARE TRYING TO
CAPITALIZE ON MOMENTUM FORCES ARE TRYING TO
CAPITALIZE ON MOMENTUM
AND TONIGHT ARE ON THE CAPITALIZE ON MOMENTUM
AND TONIGHT ARE ON THE
OFFENSIVE. AND TONIGHT ARE ON THE
OFFENSIVE.
LESTER. OFFENSIVE.
LESTER.
>> RICHARD ENGLE, LESTER.
>> RICHARD ENGLE,
THANK YOU. >> RICHARD ENGLE,
THANK YOU.
>>> THE WHITE HOUSE THANK YOU.
>>> THE WHITE HOUSE
SAYS PRESIDENT BIDEN >>> THE WHITE HOUSE
SAYS PRESIDENT BIDEN
HAS BEEN BRIEFED ON SAYS PRESIDENT BIDEN
HAS BEEN BRIEFED ON
THOSE REPORTS FROM HAS BEEN BRIEFED ON
THOSE REPORTS FROM
POLAND AS HE TAKES THOSE REPORTS FROM
POLAND AS HE TAKES
PART IN THE G20 POLAND AS HE TAKES
PART IN THE G20
MEETING IN BALI. PART IN THE G20
MEETING IN BALI.
KELLY O'DONNELL IS MEETING IN BALI.
KELLY O'DONNELL IS
THERE. KELLY O'DONNELL IS
THERE.
WHAT ARE YOU HEARING? THERE.
WHAT ARE YOU HEARING?
>> Reporter: THAT WHAT ARE YOU HEARING?
>> Reporter: THAT
POLISH INCIDENT ROSE >> Reporter: THAT
POLISH INCIDENT ROSE
TO NEEDING THE POLISH INCIDENT ROSE
TO NEEDING THE
PRESIDENT'S ATTENTION. TO NEEDING THE
PRESIDENT'S ATTENTION.
HE WAS ON THE PHONE PRESIDENT'S ATTENTION.
HE WAS ON THE PHONE
WITH NATO ALLY POLISH HE WAS ON THE PHONE
WITH NATO ALLY POLISH
PRESIDENT DUDA BEFORE WITH NATO ALLY POLISH
PRESIDENT DUDA BEFORE
THE SUN CAME UP ON PRESIDENT DUDA BEFORE
THE SUN CAME UP ON
WHAT IS WEDNESDAY THE SUN CAME UP ON
WHAT IS WEDNESDAY
MORNING. WHAT IS WEDNESDAY
MORNING.
THEN A CALL TO THE MORNING.
THEN A CALL TO THE
NATO SECRETARY-GENERAL THEN A CALL TO THE
NATO SECRETARY-GENERAL
AND THE PRESIDENT'S NATO SECRETARY-GENERAL
AND THE PRESIDENT'S
NATIONAL SECURITY AND THE PRESIDENT'S
NATIONAL SECURITY
ADVISOR WAS WORKING NATIONAL SECURITY
ADVISOR WAS WORKING
THE PHONES OVERNIGHT ADVISOR WAS WORKING
THE PHONES OVERNIGHT
TRYING TO DETERMINE THE PHONES OVERNIGHT
TRYING TO DETERMINE
WHAT U.S. OFFICIALS TRYING TO DETERMINE
WHAT U.S. OFFICIALS
SAY IS THE GROUND WHAT U.S. OFFICIALS
SAY IS THE GROUND
TRUTH. SAY IS THE GROUND
TRUTH.
THEY SAY THAT RUSSIA TRUTH.
THEY SAY THAT RUSSIA
HAS A POOR TRACK THEY SAY THAT RUSSIA
HAS A POOR TRACK
RECORD ON PRECISION HAS A POOR TRACK
RECORD ON PRECISION
MAKING THEIR RECORD ON PRECISION
MAKING THEIR
CULPABILITY SEEM MAKING THEIR
CULPABILITY SEEM
PLAUSIBLE BUT THEY CULPABILITY SEEM
PLAUSIBLE BUT THEY
WANT THE FACTS. PLAUSIBLE BUT THEY
WANT THE FACTS.
TODAY THE PRESIDENT IS WANT THE FACTS.
TODAY THE PRESIDENT IS
EXPECTED TO KEEP HIS TODAY THE PRESIDENT IS
EXPECTED TO KEEP HIS
G20 SCHEDULE,|||crazy level of fitness that some people have 
and it's showing us just how lazy we are   yeah very cold my fingers get very red immediately 
colder than if you would put your hand directly   into snow this is colder what's up guys welcome 
back to the channel today we are exploring the   amazing lake of Morskie Oko in tatra national park 
and we couldn't be more excited we just came in   and we are ready to explore so let's go if 
you want to come here from zakopane and you   don't have your own car that's no problem at all 
there's public buses commuting to the Morskie Oko   entrance on a very very frequent level and it's 
a 15 Złoty per person to come here and then the   entrance itself at the moment is eight Złoty per 
person but you can pay with card so don't worry   and those buses that naomi just mentioned they 
leave from the main bus station in zakopane center   every 10 minutes now we are here it's nine 
o'clock in the morning and there's already lots   of tourists here but we cannot wait to get inside 
it's around two hours of a walk from the entrance   of tatra national park to the lake itself we are 
already greeted with some stunning nature here   something to keep in mind when you come into the 
tatra national park and you're headed towards   Morskie Oko there's plenty of people with 
horse carriages that are more than willing   to take you all the way to Morskie Oko itself you 
just have to pay them in cash if you do want to do   that so if you do want to take a horse carriage to 
Morskie Oko and you don't want to do the two-hour   trail there i would bring some cash with you i'm 
not too sure how much it is exactly but i do know   that you can bargain them down i've heard anywhere 
from 50 to 80 Złoty to get there per person the   trail that leads towards Morskie Oko it 
is actually a paved kind of like a road   and cars and stuff like that do drive past 
you as you're walking along so keep that in mind   it is not like a totally wild trail so 
it's a little bit easier on your feet   also something worth mentioning the 
nature here that is surrounding this road   you are basically incredibly thick trees cover 
both sides of the trail so you don't have that   much of an open view on too much nature yet but 
apparently when you get to the lake that changes   so we are only about 20 minutes into this hike 
right now and we cannot wait to get further in to   the national park itself if there is one reason 
for you to come and visit zakopane this is it   it's the nature and we are here and we cannot 
wait and we are luckily blessed with beautiful   blue sky weather today as well it's actually a 
little bit warm we wore slightly heavier clothes   because we were expecting it to be a little 
bit chilly because it's so early in the morning   but no we're already starting to sweat oh 
my god you guys kind of halfway i think um   we have this absolutely beautiful view onto the 
mountains and there's actually still snow there   and if you're here in the area you can kind of 
if you look to the left walking towards Morskie Oko   looking to the left i think it's pretty 
much all slovakia slovakia right yeah   and there's still loads of snow in the area 
there which is so beautiful so we just came across   some stunning water rapids or waterfalls the 
water was really rushing down and you can capture   some incredible sounds there and i believe it 
was called Potok Roztoka if i'm pronouncing   that correctly but it is a beautiful stop along 
the trail towards Morskie Oko now we're going to   continue on this beautiful trail and it's actually 
getting more and more beautiful as we walk along along the way we took a right now and the road 
kind of splits so both streets go towards the   Morskie Oko lake but one of them is on the normal 
street that is just usually like paved as a normal   street that cars drive on basically 
seems to continue on for the horses   for the carriages and this one 
here seems to go a little bit more   through the forest and the street is a little 
bit more challenging so depending on your own   capabilities you definitely have both options 
and we chose the more difficult looking one   it's worth mentioning as well guys that   all along the trail you will have porta-potties so 
don't worry you don't have to wander off into the   woods you do have porta potties all along the 
way i would actually suggest you not to wander   off into the woods because there was a sign 
at the entrance warning bears so if you have   to go to the toilet make sure to use the porta 
potties and don't walk into the woods by yourself   we're taking the alternative route 
you're kind of as fast as the horses   and that's a bit scary it was very close the horsey got a little bit angry there i don't 
think that we caused it ah luke said it slipped   okay for a second i thought that we caused 
the panic and but it's kind of a race now   to the top when you take the alternative route 
you're kind of overtaking the same carriage over   and over and then on the paved parts the horses 
overtake you again i hope that that horsey is okay   it's really crazy we are currently around an hour 
and a half now into this hike and there's people   running past us in both directions some 
people running up some people running down   crazy level of fitness that some people have 
and it's showing us just how lazy we are   at least we're not taking the horses so right 
here is where the horse carriages come to the   stop it's worth noting that the horse carriages do 
not bring you all the way to Morskie Oko i believe   we still have roughly another kilometer or 
so to go before we get to the lake itself   so if you are planning on taking the horse all the 
way there you will still have to do some walking   but you are greeted at the end 
of the horse carriage trail   with absolutely stunning snow-capped 
mountains in the distance   and all of the nature around here is truly amazing  one of a kind there's a national park for a   reason and i cannot i can understand paying an 
entrance fee into somewhere as beautiful as this also at the end of the horse carriage trail you 
have a restaurant too i believe actually a few   restaurants bistros stuff like that so you do have   a selection of food available if you're like us 
and you don't bring food with you we are actually   we are actually hiking fasted at the moment 
so we haven't had any food just yet we just   brought water with us but i'm sure on 
the way back down we're gonna stop off   at one of these restaurants smells like they 
have some pretty amazing food we are getting   closer and closer to the area where there's 
still snow and i'm kind of wondering if we're   gonna get the chance to actually touch some 
snow that would be really amazing we actually   brought the drone with us today thinking we 
were gonna get some epic nature drone shots   but there's signs everywhere at the entrance of 
the national park saying no drones allowed seems   like every time we bring the drone with us we're 
not allowed to fly it and every time we forget our   drone we're allowed to fly it but uh yeah a little 
bit of a shame we're gonna try and capture as many   beautiful shots as we can though with this little 
bad boy here oh my god you guys we made it all the   way up to the lake now and check this out 
you have a stunning view up here and it is   a little bit colder actually up here than it was 
on the trail itself because the cold mountain air   kind of comes down directly from the mountain 
just goes over the lake and if you're standing   here obviously you're going to stand directly in 
the cold wind up here you also have like a little   restaurant situation obviously toilets bars cafe 
whatever you might need when you get all the way   up here but we're just going to enjoy the lake 
for a while and then maybe get something to eat   because we kind of deserve it after this hike so 
Morskie Oko is indeed the largest lake   in the tatra mountains and it apparently 
was sculpted during the last ice age due to   falling glaciers it's incredibly beautiful and 
you can see a ton of snow off in the distance so apparently the lake itself can 
be frozen all the way into may   and it's may right now and it is actually pretty 
much surrounded by ice have a look at this this is going to be this is going to be 
a very slippery experience i am wearing   a pair of chucks as you can see so yeah 
currently walking on ice and it's may   what do you think guys you 
actually have the crunch under your   feet when you walk like as if it's kind 
of january or february it's super nice weirdly enough even though there is so much 
snow i mean it does get a little bit colder   up here because of the wind obviously 
but there is so much snow still here   but yet it doesn't feel necessarily cold 
and the sun still kind of warms you up   as you crunch through the snow it's so nice i 
don't think that words can truly or accurately   describe just the sheer beauty 
that is this lake of Morskie Oko   the snow just adds a whole different dimension to 
it we really weren't expecting to see snow in may   i know that we're probably going to say this 100 
times in this video but it is really interesting   i'm sure that the water is absolutely freezing as 
well and from other videos that we have watched   apparently you can do a walk around the entire 
circumference of the lake itself in roughly an   hour or so so i don't know if we're going to do 
that we're definitely starting to get a little bit   hungry and we did see that they have an atm and 
everything like that in a restaurant that faces   down onto the lake so i'm sure that that is the 
perfect next step for us and everything like that so how cold is it uh very very cold 
my fingers get very red immediately so   um kind of feels it's colder than if you would 
put your hand directly into snow this is colder   okay guys so quick pit stop we had a little 
bit too much fun taking pictures and footage   around the lake and i ended up going and stepping 
on like a platform that was literally made of ice   it broke and my leg went straight into the lake 
and let me tell you something my foot ankle and   calf is absolutely frozen stiff right now so i'm 
gonna take this shoe off take my wet sock off   leave my foot in the sunshine for a while 
and then we're gonna go and grab some food so we decided against having food directly at 
the lake up there because it was quite busy   and we kind of walking past this other restaurant 
we already smelled that they have some sausages   on the grill on the barbecue and i was kind 
of looking forward to having a sausage from   the barbecue so now we went all the way here 
and we got one Kiełbasa one Karczek and then   um one portion of Oscypek and 
Mirinda and pepsi how much did we pay   in total for the food we ended 
up just paying 60 Złoty obviously   it's going to be a little bit more expensive 
because of the location where we are but i   think it is still very good value both of us are 
absolutely starving as we said earlier in this   video we did this hike completely and utterly 
fasted with no food just water with us so now   we're gonna have some nice sugary beverages and 
get this beautiful polish food in our bellies that food was absolutely perfect it was exactly 
what we needed and we didn't actually realize how   hungry we were until we sat down at that table and 
had that delicious food it's really warmed us up   and it's definitely going to power us on the way 
back down to the end of this park also speaking   of not realizing just how hungry we were after 
we had the Kiełbasa and the Karczek and the   cheese as well we ended up going and getting a 
piece of Szarlotka as well and that was actually   our very first try i believe of Szarlotka apple pie 
so like traditional polish apple pie and it was   very delicious the two hour mark for this hike is 
realistic i think we made it in exactly two hours   but it is only realistic if you have a very quick 
pace and you do not stop so we i think we stopped   once just to use the bathroom real quick the one 
of those porta potties or what you call it   so that was like maybe two minutes or something 
like that and then we continued walking in a very   quick pace and if you are a slow walker definitely 
calculate more than two hours to get up and down   okay guys so we have completed the full trip now 
we are just coming back down to the parking lot   area of tatra national park and Morskie Oko 
hike so what was your impression of Morskie Oko   my impression is that it is definitely 
worth visiting and worth the hype as well   i understand why so many people of you 
uh so many of you were uh suggesting it   to us and Morskie Oko by the way 
translates to i believe eye of the sea   and i can definitely see why the people named 
that lake up their eye of the sea it's absolutely   stunning and definitely worth your time and 
sweat to get up there yeah it's definitely a   natural beauty to behold when you get to the lake 
itself it's surrounded still by ice and it is just   stunning there is obviously large groups of people 
and tourists that come here on a daily basis so   do prepare yourself for that but in terms of the 
hike itself it is two hours up and two hours back   and to be honest it's really not that difficult 
i went in a pair of converse and naomi went   and a pair of trainers that she got in albania 
five euro trainers five euro trainers from albania   so you really don't need any sort of special 
equipment to bring with you on this hike and   there is always the option of taking horses up 
and back if that's something that you need to do   just please before you go up make sure that 
you check the weather forecast because you are   quite up high in the mountains and weather changes 
very very fast so if you are planning to go up   make sure to check the weather beforehand 
and don't just go without being a little bit   organized yeah it's a very good point um speaking 
of horses we just got passed out by some horse   horses there but yeah check the weather um it 
changes very rapidly obviously being in a national   park and being surrounded by mountains you can 
have crystal blue clear sky like we have right now   and in 30 seconds you can be in the thunderstorm 
so definitely come prepared for that and yeah   we really really had an amazing day here in tatra 
and at Morskie Oko as well and we would 100   recommend you to do the same for now we're going 
to see you guys in the next video my name is luke   my name is naomi we are the two mad explorers 
and this is your reminder to keep exploring see   you later guys thanks for watching thanks very 
much for watching this video we just launched our   community our channel memberships here on youtube 
so if you want to be part of this community make   sure to check out the benefits and perks down 
below all of this is only possible because of   you guys and with your support we will 
be able to keep going for a lot longer|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||few days staying here in Hajnówka in eastern 
Poland and the place we're staying at doesn't   have a gym we're gonna find one in town here at 
apartment block 22. it's just the main entrance   hell yeah gym in a basement I really love it 
who needs Windows man when you're working out so working out here is 15 zloty 
that's about three and a half euros so there we go got my gym in big town small 
cities if you search you will find and that's   what I want to keep on doing so I was a good 
arm day I think it's nice to have spent a few   nights here among these older apartment blocks 
that I keep seeing everywhere really gives   you a bit more of that genuine local Polish 
feel we're leaving in direction of Lithuania   but first that rear tire it's been 
really worn out I've got to replace it it's another departure day we're going to leave you got it packed up here almost first 
we go to the lake and then Białystok ready to roll out she's got the helmets bye intercom still saying that same tune cheers 
pretty much still in national park Białowieża yeah there's still a lake a 
bit up north called Siemianówka let's a go   get your motor running lots of popo 
today second or third I see then again   this is also a customs region right 
close to the Belarusian border   by the lake but they have this massive train 
yard that makes sense because on the other   side of that lake bridge is the border 
with Belarus so maybe the tracks don't   match sometimes they do sometimes they don't 
so you got to switch trains and whatnot hold on this is the lake oh but it's pretty much land it's 
mostly land still it did look like that on the map   yeah it's like a sandbank through the 
lake I wonder if they made that or if   it was already here sort of this is the railway Freight happens in between Poland and that country 
you got distracted there by a little something   got a lot of sixes and nines anything 
interesting about this uh milestone so these concrete walls continuing here around 
the bend beyond the railroad got me thinking   is it a real lake turns out it is a artificial 
lake one of the biggest ones once in Poland and   it also provides I think still a drinking 
water for Białystok it's pretty massive we're   gonna follow it a bit westward there's 
more of this I'm going to the beach drop it this looks like the beach of course it's a lake why was 
I expecting Baltic blue water I'll give you a push hold on yes I'll give you a 
push turn around like this there you go bon voyage there we go all right let's 
see what we can find out here speak any English German English 
is ok Pedro nice to meet you   so it's a 17 and 130 140. do you guys 
have tires you have to order yeah so   how fast is the order next day you know 
nowadays it can be hard to find the 17.   oh that's the battle ax the Bridgestone this is 
18 or 19 uh yeah know one word in Dutch which one   like lots of Polish people in the Netherlands 
man yeah so he has a Dutch vocabulary going through some tires today it doesn't have 
anything here but guaranteed tomorrow and look   at this there's they have tractionators 
but they're very off-road oriented but that's the tire I wanted last year he's 
calling the boss right now wow he's discussing   the price oh yes yes I thought it was Friday 
tomorrow also Peter yes Pedro okay everyone   Peter yeah nice to meet you man you're the boss 
man yeah e07 plus because I'm not a big fan of   the standard but the plus I've always wanted 
to try it and there's a lot of contact patch   and it's going to rain in the Baltics I'm 
trying to get connection with the road he used to work 10 years how 
long in the Netherlands Belgium back since 2000 back in Poland yeah 22 years 
ago cheers I'm hyped to try out a new one   it's always fun I had to stop myself from getting 
that tractionator smaller blocks little contact   patch in the Baltics it's bound to rain again 
so I'm gonna be smart about it there's guys   right now watching who just love watching 
me riding all the off-road stuff oh my god   what happened boys you put passenger foot pegs on 
the thing and suddenly thank you for the coffee   Peter no problem we got a place yeah we'll 
see you tomorrow morning get a nice tire on   there you even got the Senseo coffee machine 
you know that's a very Dutch thing to have my wife working for Phillips that's why ah well 
do you got the discount then yeah Phillips has the   discount store I have family who works in Phillips 
also so that's the night in Białystok that we   knew was an option so let's run our errands 
and you know maybe have a look at the place some place here on the corner it's the Caravan there we go hey you'll love it do you have something i can 
carry because I have two hands empty oh that's   that's very nice of you thank you everybody's 
speaking English here in Białystok very nice Adam's your name huh and you're Pedro nice to meet you too my wife   Alexandra Good day good day kitchen has everything yeah any questions oh 
yeah just uh the Wi-Fi password it's over here motorcycle parking spot perfect beautiful day lively streets 
oh we finished the errands for today   we got a tire coming should be 
arriving tomorrow got a place to   stay and still some time to check 
out the center here in Białystok one of the   smaller cities in Poland population-wise 
that is like top ten but apparently it's   one of the most densely populated cities 
yeah so for the time being if all goes   well this city looks like the farewell song 
for the time being here in Poland because   going north it's about 150 kilometers 
tops to the border of Lithuania   and that is where we will be heading next on this 
journey by the Baltic Sea farming in the city now of course the place where we can find Mariska   is nearby the palace gardens because 
that's the nearest place with nature so   that's her natural refuge when she's 
in a city nice so what is this here the Versailles of Poland so park Branicki this here is called the Versailles of Poland 
which is understandable I have been to Versailles   and though not as big it's still something very 
relaxing about the gardens that's why you came out   here huh immediately attracted to all the trees 
so building of this commenced midway the 18th   century so it makes perfectly sense that it has 
all these high peak French society elements from   that time as the French back then still dominated 
Continental Europe so here you see Atlas carrying   the weight of the world on his shoulders while 
our Atlas carries the weight of my sorry bum   around the world Branicki is turning out to be a 
lot more relaxing than what I had expected look   who's here also our friend Joe bison Zubr and we 
end the day here by another monument commemorating the troublesome past and struggle of Poland 
erected here this monument in name of the   fallen of the city of Białystok yeah later it was 
changed to commemorate all the fallen and murdered   in Poland during the war and even later 
the inscription was put on the monument God   honore and homeland and then 
later still was added independence and of course once more in Poland 
you are reminded of that past   that with every passing year seems a 
bit longer ago but it's interesting   you know because you go through this nice 
little town center with this beautiful park you've easily reminded all of a sudden 
of the harder days but maybe that's also   a page that Poland is turning you know 
because these monuments at the end of   the day are beginning to show their age and 
I think they've been moving on in Poland hello and on that historic note we 
end this nice day here in Białystok   tomorrow we get the tires sorted so we can ride on see you in the next one folks ciao|||welcome to the channel my name's Rob and in
today's video I just want to prepare you because this may be a little bit of a mess because
in today's video we are looking at some of the Polish funny internet hits I don't even
know what I'm expecting here but it may be a complete train wreck of videos but if you
do enjoy you know what to do my friend hit that like button down below and subscribe
for more maybe of this is I'm not sure if it's ever good to ask old
badgers oh grandmas if marijuana should be legalized because I don't know many that would
say yes thanks for that um foreign [Music] well this is certainly sticking to stereotypes
of old drunk Polish people true is one of those things that's just overhyped
however this video oh man uh he's going to get wasted like a prince and I will not repeat
the second part of his sentence bud all right top camera foreign a 
million  I think he's trying to say aluminum aluminum
not amelium aluminum car paint aluminum okay [Laughter] [Music] I have a feeling the guy with the
camera he actually knows what it is he is just trolling this bloke here isn't he because
he knows he can't say it correctly and he's actually making me question how I say it 210 that's the ride I assume he's going 210. no we can't be going 210 kilometers an hour [Music] oh God sorry hang on I just have to go back slightly
don't crash they won't scrape us off the whatever they proceed to crash oh my word some people
are idiots they're idiots right okay next up what annoys you the most on a daily basis what water Earth hemoglobin that annoys you
the much what did did he just not understand the question is interesting yeah Mr foreign too much a man cares about his equipment more than
his wife and curva what is what is going on okay how are you going to spend New Year's
Eve this year foreign to be fair that is me  on New Year's Eve the days of going out partying
have gone I would happily prefer to sit on my computer playing a computer game on New
Year's Eve hear the fireworks in the background while I'm playing on the computer and this
dude looks exactly like that what a response completely foreign why is he speaking like that cannot be his
real voice I sometimes listen to myself back when editing these videos and I think do I
really sound like that this guy surely has to be putting on this voice because that cannot
be his real accent um foreign [Laughter] [Music] over here we have like six weeks unless you're
at private school where you have loads of weeks but you do get lazy he has a point he
does have a point if you do nothing for such a long time you do get lazy  foreign [Music] foreign foreign why are they interviewing him through the
window why why why why can he not step outside can they not go in the house why do they have
to have a window in the way so we just talked about foreign what is going on we've we've hit a phase of
interviews right this is a phase of interviews in this video and it is like they are on talking
from that first the first clip about marijuana are these guys on marijuana that lady just
then making those noises seem like she had been smoking some wacky backy foreign thank you it's Independence Day tomorrow there's no
flags up curva oh that was brilliant that's brilliant I do find myself using that word
now you know when you become multilingual and I don't think I am multilingual really
I'm not but I do occasionally say you know gen Korea when I say thank you instead uh
but I have slowly started saying karva uh instead of f-u-c-k Legend [Applause] actually will tell  you off [Laughter] foreign foreign [Laughter] [Music] I don't 
know threes what an hour the interviewer has just made him question
his life choices [Laughter] they're off oh that's so funny oh I need to breathe I need to breathe that's one of the best interviews I have ever
seen that is the best interview I've ever seen it must be up there have a breathe have
a breathe from next up next up yes it's just got better why is the interviewer
asking why is the interviewer asking if you smile for me much and then it's just got personal
that is a proper personal uh attack that this bloke has just made Arnold uh rodzen Roger
rodzen this is just mental it started off a bit weird and now it's just turned crazy okay there's apparently 47 seconds of this
guy try and I said a guy trying to say van near me I think I did that quite well but tongue twisters
over and over again but I'm not going to attempt that is [Laughter] I want to say in a recent video where I did
tongue twisters I think I pronounced it better than him now he is probably high as a kite
or drunk as a drunk as a frog is that saying I don't know but I think I did it better than
him foreign [Music] foreign [Laughter] foreign [Laughter] has certain stereotypes and I'll go again
with England you know we love tea we love the queen king um Poland has certain stereotypes
that aren't necessarily it's not there aren't necessarily true like how polls like to drink
a lot and it's not necessarily true it is a stereotype though some of these clips are
not helping the cause of that stereotype that negative stereotype this is not helping the
cause try store move Ivan  ization foreign [Laughter] just leave the poor guy alone let him sleep
yes foreign don't drive near him now don't oh look at the Sparks there we go um as I said the problem is in this video some
of the stereotypes are shown they are shown those interviews absolutely brilliant I said
that that is probably the best interview I've seen where he was a Sparky become just to
top up his pension became uh well a walking advertising board and realized that was a
poor life choice a poor life choice give it up throwing it all off oh those at Midland
views gave me a laugh thank you so much for watching I hope you enjoyed too enjoyed this
too um just wacky absolutely wacky these internet videos though they really do show just insane
scenes sometimes don't they but thank you so much for watching you are truly Legends
please do make sure you like And subscribe for more if you want to check out our Vlog
channel of our trips to Poland go to Charlie and rob.com and I will catch you next time|||hi are you planning to move to poland and renting a flood is still in front of you in this video we'll get through the most common things to know and standards to expect you will get to know how to search for a flood in poland and what to ask your potential landlord here we go chess i'm veronica from welcome home and i'm your guide in the relocation process if the formal issues are still ahead of you check out our previous videos 7 things to know before coming to poland and things to do after moving now let's talk about something nicer how to search for a flat in poland size layout naming let's start with some basic stuff the size and layout of a typical polish apartment in a polish advertisement you will find the information that the number of rooms refers to the actual number this means that the living room and a bedroom the one you know as a one bedroom apartment will be rented out as a two room apartment in some offers you might find the information m2 and three and four something like this what it is m stands for mies kanye an apartment and the number next to it is a number of rooms in the apartment so m2 is a living room and bedroom kitchen and bathroom is not taken into the account so m2 is a one bedroom apartment something smaller a living room with sofa bed kitchen and bathroom the one you know a studio flood it's called cavalerca in polish quite commonly the shared polish apartments don't have a common space a living room but just individual rooms kitchen in shasta apartment is usually separate and quite small and the tenants share one bathroom it's also quite common to find an apartment with two rooms one with bathtub or a shower and second one with just a toilet amenities fully equipped what does it really mean in a standard apartment for rent there will always be a fridge and a cooktop or hope however you call it in a new apartment it will probably be electric and an older one expect gas cooktop also there will probably be an oven and a washing machine a washing machine if not in a bathroom can be found in the kitchen a dishwasher can be expected in new buildings or freshly renovated the older ones may simply lack the space to install it you will probably not find a coffee maker but expect an electric kettle which is not obvious freedoms from southern nations who simply don't drink tea be careful with a dryer it may not be what you think the wild nicole dryer is actually laundry rack a tumble dryer isn't common even in private houses an iron and ironing desk are not a standard but they are relatively easy to buy same for mop and bucket vacuum cleaner and kitchenware pots pans dishes and silverware ask your landlord if it's possible to equip you with that even for an additional cost be careful with the photos the very fact that water or wine glasses are featured in the apartment pictures doesn't mean that they are included so make sure with the landlords what is the full equipment central heating cold winters and temperature below zero degrees are fact in poland but don't be afraid central heating is standard in every apartment the radiator called calorifer in polish is available in every room the most popular ones are central gas or external city regulated the second one is often included in the rent which makes its price fixed and predictable central gas is calculated based on the actual usage of gas and so will be the bill remember that in winter months you will pay more its advantage on the other hand is that when it gets colder the building can turn on the heating earlier in case of the city regulated system the season is regulated and lasts from october to april if the apartment is equipped with a dual function air conditioner heater you can warm yourself up but these are standard in commercial and services premises but not in the resolution ones obviously you should make sure that heating in your rental apartment is functional and efficient because it will affect your utility bills utilities utilities are very important aspect of the apartment rental this monthly cost can significantly influence the rental price so make sure what you actually pay for water electricity waste disposal and internet are the most common components of the utilities additionally it can include gas for example in a previously mentioned central gas heating a water heater or a cooktop when choosing an apartment make sure who is responsible for signing the contract with the utility suppliers in poland when it goes for the long term it usually applies to the tenant but it will be easier if your landlord will take this duty and you will pay only for the usage when it comes to the internet fast connection isn't a problem in poland and there are several suppliers to choose from here as much as with other utilities it will be asked if the londoner will sign the contract when he has many apartments he can negotiate better prices than you on your own waste management fun fact one of the typical feature of a polish apartment is a garbage can hidden in the cabinet under the sink but let's leave the jokes apart and talk more about the waste the waste collection costs are included in the utility charge since 2020 recycling has been mandatory and enforced by cities and local governments yes it hasn't been long but better later than never those who recycle pay less for example in katowice the recyclable collection fee costs 26 lots per person an unsorted waste collection costs about 50 shorty twice as much be careful if a single person in the entire building fails to comply the recycled rules the whole building may pay the city may impose a fee so it's worth thinking not only about yourself but about whole community pricing as i live and work in katowice i can best tell you about our sign legion real estate market in the larger cities like krakow wrote rough or warsaw the prices will be much higher but also you'll have a bigger choice the average prices are as follows a room in a shared apartment small but cozy and renovated apartment around 800 slotted something bigger around thousand the lower standard room was about 600 zloty the price include the utilities studio in a low standard it's about 1100 zloty higher standard costs about 1500 slotted you have to add the utilities finding a nice and renovated studio flat for under thousands lotte will be very difficult one bedroom apartment the price starts at 1400 zloty but the average is 1600. plus utilities usually if the apartment is priced for 1500 zloty you have to add not only the utilities but also the administrative fee we will tell more about that in our next video the prices of a higher standard and biggest apartments may go up to two thousand eight hundred slaughter plus utilities a two bedroom apartment would cost about two thousand five hundred zloty plus the utilities and often plus the administrative fee so the total amount may be about three thousand zloty if you leave the city center and don't care about standard that much you may find a place for around 2500 slot a large two bedroom apartment freshly renovated and in the city center may cost about 5 000 water including all costs there is also one more option especially for students a dormitory old-style dormitories in poland don't have a good reputation they are the most economic option but they offer a push standard fortunately the market situation is changing constantly for example in katowice we have a brand new dormitory if you rent an apartment there for only the academic year the price starts for around 1 300 slotted for a 15 square meter studio flat and around 2000 slotted for a 25 square meter studio with a balcony as you can see the rates are similar to those on the market but if you are a community person you will have an access to a large common space with a kitchen study room gym cinema room and many more there is also the dormitory operated by the silesian university the prices are much lower but also the standard and the location are worse a double room costs about 400 zloty a single for 500 and there are also studio apartments for around 600 zloty per month where to search where to search there are two basic options search on your own on the internet or ask an agency the internet is the most convenient way to search for a flat so i will focus on that you have plenty of options within different budgets there are two most popular polish rental platforms oilx and autodom autodom is a national platform where you can find homes and apartments for both buy and rent usually offers are placed and promoted by rental agencies so you may expect a fee if you decide to rent a flat there read every ad carefully and if not mentioned there ask the promoter direct directly to be clear about the costs on the other hand oylex is dedicated mostly for regular people who have their apartment and want to rent them out you may browse many different standard ads before you find something interesting but this will give you an idea of the standard and pricing oil leaks and autodom are the most popular ones but not the only you can also search on gumtree or facebook marketplace if you are an erasmus student check out erasmus.com the problem you may face is that most of the ads are in polish so you will have to use the translator if you have any doubts ask the landlord the honest one should answer all your questions summary okay guys i think that's a lot to consider when searching for an apartment at the end of the day it will be your long-term place and you want to film at home right on our website we share some more recommendations on what to consider when searching for a flat also we included some fun facts about polish standards all the links are below we hope now that with our tips you will easily find your perfect place and when you find it check out our next video about the formal aspects of rental terms agreements and conditions did you enjoy this video please help us continue with this project and show us your support by leaving like or a comment and don't forget to subscribe to our channel good luck and see you in poland|||We spend the whole academic Year working for local communities We create student teams made of true leaders We are the leaders who want changes and we believe that they are achievable Each of us can change the world We manage plan, budget We work outside in communities and in campusses during official meetings And unofficial too We learn ourselves and teach others We realize projects many of them We are familiar with the idea of the sustainable development We understand the concept of the Corporate Social Responsibility Ecology Entrepreneurship Community We know how those elements work together We work for others We do it for ourselves Once a year we present our initiatives to a panel of judges At the competition we show measurable results of our projects We are not interested in class theory We are proud to present the outcome of our actions We are not worried about the score We are waiting for the evaluation We know that business leaders have high expectations We met presidents Members of board Top business executives We talk We ask for their advice They are the ones who help us achieve more They call us pearls True talents and we call ourselves Enactus Enactus Enactus Entreprenuership Action Us We are in action We are Enactus Poland In 39 countries On 1600 Universities You also can be a part of it If you have the desire and courage to change the world to change yourself to learn to try new things indyvidual with passion in a team Join Us|||(upbeat music) - Do you wanna try some Polish food and not sure what you'll like? My family is originally from Poland. So I've been exposed to Polish food for quite some time now. In this video I'm gonna cover some food that I ate on my recent trip to Poland and what it's called. So if you wanna try some Polish food you can know what to look out for. Don't forget to like,
subscribe, and share this video with your friends. My favorite Polish soups are
(speaks in foreign language) which is like a dill pickle soup. I really like (speaks in foreign language) which is a tomato soup. (speaks in foreign language)
which is a mushroom soup. (speaks in foreign language)
which is like a chicken noodle. I also like (speaks in foreign language) which is like a beet soup with dumplings. And the dumplings are filled
with sauerkraut and mushrooms. So those are my favorites
but there is no shortages of soup flavors to try in Poland. Pierogi or Pierogi come in
many, many, many flavors. I've listed a few here
just so you can get an idea of what flavors appeal to you. Feel free to screenshot
this page as a reference. My favorite are the cheese
and potato filled ones as well as the ones with
sauerkraut and mushroom. Also there are dessert pierogis as well. You're probably wondering
what I'm talking about or what I mean by that. But essentially you can order pierogis with strawberries inside, blueberries, cherries, raspberries, and then you just add a bit
of butter or sugar on top, sometimes sour cream is an option. I was so obsessed with blueberry pierogis on my latest trip to Poland that my aunt even made
them from scratch for me. I know, I'm lucky. Meat was always present on
my kitchen table growing up. So it came as no surprise
that throughout Poland there are some amazing meat meals. I tend to stick with kielbasa. It's a safe bet for me, it's a sausage. Usually it's served with bread and one place even gave
it to me with pickles. Then we had (speaks in foreign language) which are breaded pork cutlets. We probably ate this every other day. It was so delicious we
just couldn't get enough. There were also a lot of
(speaks in foreign language). Some of them come with meat, others come with other stuffing options such as sauerkraut and mushrooms. And of course there are a
ton of other meat dishes that I've missed such as
(speaks in foreign language), but this video is just to get you started on what I actually ate over
my two week tour of Poland. If you're interested in
non-meat slash veggie dishes you can try (speaks in foreign language) which are Polish apple pancakes. Or potato pancakes, (speaks
in foreign language). If you like cheese, we tried
(speaks in foreign language) for the first time which is smoked cheese made of salted sheep milk. Yes some of them come with bacon wrapped but you can pick and choose what you like. Many Polish people also
pick their own mushrooms to include in their meals. So make sure to pick and
find ones like these. And leave ones like
those alone (chuckles). Okay now let's briefly touch on desserts. When I was younger and visiting Poland, (speaks in foreign language)
is what stood out to me. After being away for 15 years I wanted to see if they were
still popular in Poland. (speaks in foreign
language) is essentially waffle with cream,
fruits, candy, chocolate. There's an infinite amount
of topping possibilities. Another thing to look out for is (speaks in foreign language)
which is a hard waffle rolled up into a tube of sorts (chuckles) and there's whipped cream inside. It's so yummy. Of course I need to cover
(speaks in foreign language) which is a famous Polish donut. You can have them glazed
or with powdered sugar. But now there's a variety
of more toppings these days and inside you're gonna
have a jam filled center. So I grew up with these candies. My mom always called them
(speaks in foreign language) 'cause that's the plural. But here they're called
(speaks in foreign language). So I'm gonna show you what
this'll actually looks like. And in the center it
should have a gooey thing but each one's a little bit
different so let's try that. Um hum, so good. And now we're gonna try a
Saint Martin's croissant which is protected by the European Union Certificate of Authenticity which means it can only
be reproduced here. I think it's raining (laughs). When you're in Poland, why don't you give the Bar Mleczny a shot which literally means milk bar. They're usually on the cheaper side and have traditional style Polish food. If you can't read it in Polish, they usually have a
bunch of food on display, so that's helpful. Most places that we've seen in Poland do have an English translation
underneath the menu. This one doesn't in particular. So if there's a Polish dish
you really love and wanna try maybe google it in advance
so you can actually know what you're looking out for. But you cant' go wrong with
these little breakfast spots, lunch spots, dinner spots. Come here and you're in good hands. Also I created another
video which is called Poland Travel Video, What to do in Poland, which will help you navigate the beautiful country of Poland. Did you enjoy that video? Well let me know in the comments below. Let's become friends, let's connect. And I'll see you on the next one.|||[Music] okay can you pronounce it oh boy stranger yes it means happiness oh wow do you have anything easier how do you say thank you in polish it's easy you can say jungkook gingrich oh yeah i've heard that before yeah you can be even more polite and say way any tongue twisters any commenting twisters in polish let's start with the easy one strawberry what does that mean it's a bug sounds in the grass it does sound like bug sounds in the grass do not laugh and the last one helicopter are you kidding me it's helicopter yes it's helicopter oh okay i got that one at least i got that one you|||SABATON - 40: 1 (Official Music Video) [CROWD]
SABATON, SABATON, SABATON, SABATON! ......40 to 1 Baptized in fire 40 to 1 So silent before the storm, Awaiting command! A few has been chosen to stand, As one outnumbered by far The orders from high command: "Fight back, hold your ground!" In early September it came: A war, unknown to the world! No army may enter that land That is protected by polish hand! Unless your are forty to one! Your force will soon be undone, UNDONE! Baptised in fire!
Forty to one! Spirit of Spartans! Death and glory! Soldiers of Poland, Second to none! Wrath of the Wehrmacht brought to a halt! The 8th of September it starts, The rage of the Reich! A barrage of mortars and guns. Stand fast, the bunkers will hold! The captain has pledged his life: "I’ll face my fate here!" The sound of artillery strikes So fierce, the thunder of guns So come, bring on all that you’ve got! Come hell, come high water never stop! Unless you are forty to one, Your lives will soon be undone, UNDONE! Baptised in fire!
40 to 1! Spirit of Spartans Death and glory! Soldiers of Poland, Second to none! Wrath of the Wehrmacht brought to a halt! Always remember a fallen soldier! Always remember fathers and sons at war! Always remember a fallen soldier! Always remember fathers and sons at war! Always remember a fallen soldier! Always remember buried in history! No vermin may enter that land That is protected by Polish hand! Unless you are forty to one, Your force will soon be undone, UNDONE!!! Baptised in fire,
Forty to one! Spirit of Spartans, Death and glory! Soldiers of Poland, Second to none! Wrath of the Wehrmacht brought to a halt! NO! NO! NO!   He writes and translates into several languages: Joachim Moczko.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||are you an expat in poland have you already moved to poland or do you plan to relocate in the future here you will find all the information about what you need to do after relocating here we go [Music] chess i'm veronica from welcome home and i'm your guide for the relocation process last time i was talking about things that you have to do before moving to poland so if this step is still ahead of you feel free to check my previous video let's go back to the main topic let's check what you have to do pencil number passel is polish national identification number all posts have one and so shows foreigners but why do you need one since 2018 all people living in poland both polls and foreigners have to register their address when registering they will receive peso automatically but you will need pasel not only for residence purposes you will also need that for the tax report without it your employer cannot register you in the polish tax office how to get one as i already said you receive it automatically along with the residence registration the other way is to fill out the application form in polish but you will find our tips in the description below and deliver it to the city hall of the city you live in also don't forget to take your passport or id card with you how long will you have to wait your application will be accepted immediately and you will receive the peso right away residence registration in poland there is an obligation for both posts and foreigners to have their address registers if they are staying in poland for over 30 days for non-new citizens or a free month for eu citizens we call it the zameldovania if you already know that you are going to stay in poland for over these one or three months go and register your address if you are from eu efta switzerland or you are you are a family member of such a foreigner you have 30 days to register your address counting from the date of arrival to this place if you are from non-eu country we have only four days to register in order to fulfill that application visit district office opportu uh for the place you live in requirements are different from eu and non-eu citizens [Music] you will also need the application form filled out in polish if you are an eu citizen you first need to be registered in the voya vote ships office only after that you can complete some elderfunnier i'll talk about this later in this video when leaving poland or changing your address you have to notify the office this will result in the removal from the resident's address a few more things to remember a residence address is valid only as long as your rental agreement is the application is free of charge make sure with your landlord that the apartment that you are renting is a residential unit local you can only register to a flat with your residential unit status in the past failure to comply this amount of money could lead to some financial penalties but right now it's no longer valid however it might be an obstacle for some other procedures for example getting a temporary residence permit health insurance as i said in the previous video in poland there are two types of health insurance public and private health insurance is very important thinking poland non-new citizens have to get travel health insurance when applying for a visa but it usually covers only emergencies the public health insurance in poland is operated by the national health fund narudova fund and msat the health care system in poland is based on the principle of equal treatment and access for everybody when can you access public health care in poland if you are a citizen of a country of the eu after or switzerland if you have a visa with permission to work if you have a temporary residence permit if you have a permanent residence permit if you have a long-term residence permit of the eu if you have a humanitarian residence permit if you have a tolerated residence permit or if you have a refugee status in poland as i mentioned in the previous video employers on employment for a fee for a task contract get public health insurance automatically an insured employee has an obligation to report his or her family members to be covered by the nf if they are not insured yet if you are a change to get job you have to report your family members to new employer adding your family members doesn't result in higher or additional contribution all students have to be insured even if they are staying in poland only for a short term students have to apply for the insurance on their own in order to get voluntary public health insurance you need to have your address registered to get it you have to fill out some documents of course in polish and bring it to the end of that branch in your city the link to all documents is in the description what about the cost because depends on the average seller in poland in july 2021 it was about 500 slotted students and doctoral students pay less about 55 slaughter a month the most important thing about this insurance is that any of that will check your previous insurance period if you have never been in poland or if you or you didn't pay insurance for the last three months you will have to pay for the gap period the national health fund gives you access to general practitioner or family doctor however you call it in polish this le casa regina first you have to choose one go to the energetic clinics closer to your home get the documents ask the nurse for the doctor you should choose and fill out the documents according to the nurse guidance night and medical care on holidays emergency room and hospital care rehabilitation diagnostic test first you must get the revelry visit to specialists first you need to go to the general practitioner get the refl sign up on the waiting list and wait for your appointment without the referral you can go to psychiatrists oncologists dentists or gynecologists all citizens of european union and european economic trade area are entitled to get public health insurance offered by the nfd for free they only need to be insured in their country and before coming to poland they have to get the european health insurance card private insurance providers obviously you can get an insurance from the private company but you have to remember that they don't offer the same equal services as you can expect from the public one everything depends on the policy the package the cheapest one usually offers only the general practitioner and some specialists of course the more you pay the more you get but the most expensive ones can get even up to 3 000 a year one more thing to remember is that the private policies usually offer some delay periods this means that you cannot go to a certain doctor or have a surgery unless you pay the contribution for 60 or even 120 days also you have to remember that the private insurance does not cover the emergencies so in case you go to a hospital you will have to pay for treatment test and everything on your own some packages offer this sickness benefit but this is not the standard some employers especially large international companies offers the private health insurance as an extra benefit residence permit and card if you want to stay here longer than your legal stay or visa is apply for a residence permit the temporary residence permit is valid between 3 months and 3 years to apply for it you have to fill out some documents it must be done in polish then you have to bring it to the voyable ship's office along with photos and copy of your passport you have to do it at least on the last day of your legal stay in poland if you also want to start or continue working in poland you also have to apply for the temporary residence permit without permission to work to do it you have to add the attachment number one filled out by your employer a list of recommended additional documents is quite long thus i recommend you to check the website the link is in the description when submitting the application you will receive a stamp in your passport you can legally stay in poland even if your visa expires however if you would like to go back to your country then when coming back to poland you have the visa again the minimum waiting time is a month but as always everything depends on the number of people applying so better don't wait till the last moment if everything goes well you'll receive a temporary residence permit with a cart you can travel across europe or at least this ranking zone as for costs this damn duty costs 440 slotted and there is also a fee for issuing the card 50 zloty what happens if your application goes rejected you have 14 days to make a complaint to the head of office for foreigners and then they have seven days to answer you if this doesn't help you have 30 days to leave poland if you stay in poland after your legal stay or visa expires and you don't apply for temporary residence permit you will be forced to leave the country important information for eu citizens if you are an eo citizen and you want to stay in poland for more than three months you have to be registered in the avoidable ship's office some people haven't done that even after years of being in poland well you won't be expelled from the country but you might be fined okay it's time to sum up here are some tips for you when you are still in your country made a copy of as many documents as possible we also recommend translating them to polish for example birth certificate driving license bachelor master doctor diploma work certificates a certificate that proves that you are paying the health insurance contribution in your country mary's certificate if you are married remember that in poland same-sex marriages aren't legal no claim bonus if you want to have a card medical and dental records especially if you need special treatment financial records although many paul speaks english all the documents must be filled out in polish so find a friend who will help you with that and will go to the offices with you last but not least don't leave everything to the last minute the bureaucracy may take much longer than you think and you don't want to get in trouble and stressed don't you here you will find the continuation of the checklist after coming to poland four days after register your address if you are not from the eu register in the avoidable ship's office if you are from eu one week after register your address if you are from eu register your family members to the end of that via your insurance if they are not insured two weeks after get private or public health insurance if you don't have one already get a polish zloty bank account two months after apply for a temporary residence permit if you have a three month visa 10 months after apply for a residence permit if you have a 12 month visa the checklist is also available in the description so you can easily download it that's all for now i hope that your relocation process will go smoothly don't forget to subscribe to our channel and check our welcome home guide see you in poland [Music]|||O ALLIES UKRAINE AND RUSSIA. LET'S LISTEN. GREAT ALLIES. PRESIDENT DUDA. PRIME MINISTER, MR PRIME MINISTER, MR MAYOR. ALL THE FORMER MINISTERS AND PRESIDENTS. AS WELL AS MAYORS AND POLISH POLITICAL LEADERS FROM ALL ACROSS THE COUNTRY. THANK YOU FOR WELCOMING BACK. TO POLAND. YOU KNOW, IT'S NEARLY ONE YEAR AGO. NEARLY ONE YEAR AGO, I SPOKE AT THE ROYAL CASTLE HERE IN WARSAW. JUST WEEKS AFTER VLADIMIR PUTIN HAD UNLEASHED HIS MURDEROUS ASSAULT ON UKRAINE. THE LARGEST LAND WAR. IN EUROPE SINCE WORLD WAR TWO HAD BEGUN. AND THE PRINCIPLES. THAT HAS BEEN THE CORNERSTONE OF PEACE, PROSPERITY, STABILITY ON THIS PLANET FOR MORE THAN 75 YEARS. AT RISK OF BEING SHATTERED. ONE YEAR AGO. THE WORLD WAS BRACING FOR THE FALL OF KEEP WELL, I JUST COME FROM A VISITOR. KEITH AND I CAN REPORT KEEP STANDS STRONG. KEEP STANDS PROUD. IT STANDS TALL. AND MOST IMPORTANT TO STANDS FREE. WITH RUSSIA INVADED. IT WASN'T JUST UKRAINE BEING TESTED. THE WHOLE WORLD FACE TO TEST FOR THE AGES. EUROPE WAS BEING TESTED. AMERICA WAS BEING TESTED. NATO IS BEING TESTED. ALL DEMOCRACIES ARE BEING TESTED. THE QUESTIONS WE FACE WERE SIMPLE AS THEY WERE PROFOUND. WOULD YOU RESPOND? OR WOULD WE THE OTHER WAY? WOULD IT BE STRONG? WHERE DID THE WEEK WOULD BE YOU WE WOULD BE, WOULD WE THE ALL OF OUR ALLIES WOULD BE UNITED. OR DIVIDED ONE YEAR LATER. WE KNOW THE ANSWER. WE DID RESPOND, WE WOULD BE STRONG. WE WOULD BE UNITED AND THE WORLD WOULD NOT LOOK THE OTHER WAY. WE'RE ALSO FACED FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS. BUT THE COMMITMENT THE MOST BASIC PRINCIPLES. WHAT WE STAND. UP FOR THE SOVEREIGNTY OF NATIONS WOULD BE STAND UP. THE RIGHT OF PEOPLE TO LIVE FREE FROM NAKED AGGRESSION. WE STAND UP FOR DEMOCRACY. ONE YEAR LATER. WE KNOW THE ANSWERS. YES WE WOULD STAND UP FOR SOVEREIGNTY AND WE DID. YES WE WOULD STAND UP FOR THE RIGHT OF PEOPLE TO LIVE FREE FROM AGGRESSION, AND WE DID. AND WE WOULD STAND UP FOR DEMOCRACY, AND WE DID. AND YESTERDAY I HAD THE HONOR TO STAND WITH PRESIDENT ZELENSKY AND CAVE TO DECLARE THAT WE WILL KEEP STANDING UP FOR THESE SAME THINGS, NO MATTER WHAT. WHEN PRESIDENT PUTIN ORDERED HIS TANKS TO ROLL IN UKRAINE. HE THOUGHT. WE WOULD ROLL OVER. HE WAS WRONG. RANKED UKRAINIAN PEOPLE ARE TOO BRAVE. AMERICA EUROPE, A COALITION OF NATIONS FOR THE ATLANTIC TO THE PACIFIC. WE WERE TO UNIFIED DEMOCRACY WAS TOO STRONG. INSTEAD OF AN EASY VICTORY HE PERCEIVED AND PREDICTED. PUTIN LEFT. BURNOUT TANKS AND RUSSIA'S FORCES IN DELAY AND JUST IN DISARRAY. HE THOUGHT HE'D GET THE FENDER REALIZATION OF NATO. INSTEAD HE GOT THE DATA IZATION OF FINLAND. AND SWEDEN. HE THOUGHT NATURE WOULD FRACTURE AND DIVIDE. INSTEAD. NATO IS MORE UNITED AND MORE UNIFIED THAN EVER THAN EVER BEFORE. HE THOUGHT HE COULD WEAPONIZE ENERGY. TO CRACK YOUR RESOLVE EUROPE'S RESOLVE. INSTEAD WE'RE WORKING TOGETHER TO END EUROPE'S DEPENDENCE ON RUSSELL. RUSSIAN FOSSIL FUELS. HE THOUGHT AUTOCRATS LIKE HIMSELF WERE TOUGH. AND LEADERS OF DEMOCRACY WERE SOFT. AND THEN HE MET THE IRON WILL OF AMERICA AND THE NATION'S EVERYWHERE. THEY REFUSED TO ACCEPT THE WORLD GOVERNED BY FEAR AND FORCE. HE FOUND HIMSELF AT WAR WITH THE NATION LED BY A MAN WHOSE COURAGE WOULD BE FORGED IN FIRE AND STEEL PRESIDENT ZELINSKY PRESIDENT PUTIN. PRESIDENT PUTIN IS CONFRONTED WITH SOMETHING TODAY THAT YOU DIDN'T THINK WAS POSSIBLE A YEAR AGO. THE DEMOCRACY OF THE WORLD HAVE GROWN STRONGER. NOT WEAKER. BUT THE AUTOCRATS OF THE WORLD HAVE GONE WEAKER, NOT STRONGER. BECAUSE OF THE MOMENTS OF GREAT UPHEAVAL AND UNCERTAINTY. THAT KNOWING WHAT YOU STAND FOR IS MOST IMPORTANT. AND KNOWING WHO STANDS WITH YOU. MAKES ALL THE DIFFERENCE. PEOPLE OF POLAND KNOW THAT YOU KNOW THAT. IN FACT , YOU KNOW, YOU KNOW IT BETTER THAN ANYONE HERE IN POLAND. BECAUSE THAT'S WHAT SOLIDARITY MEANS. PARTITION AND OPPRESSION. WHEN THE BEAUTIFUL CITY WAS DESTROYED AFTER THE WARSAW UPRISING. DURING DECADES UNDER THE IRON FIST OF COMMUNIST RULE. POLAND ENDURED BECAUSE YOU STOOD TOGETHER. THAT'S HOW BRAVE LEADERS OF THE OPPOSITION AND THE PEOPLE OF BELARUS CONTINUE TO FIGHT FOR THEIR DEMOCRACY. THAT'S HOW THE RESOLVE OF MOLDOVAN PEOPLE. RESOLVE THE PEOPLE WHO DON'T WANT TO LIVE IN FREEDOM. GAINED THEM INDEPENDENCE AND PUT THEM ON THE PATH TO EU MEMBERSHIP. PRESIDENT SANDHU ENSURE TODAY I'M NOT SURE SHE IS, BUT I'M PROUD TO STAND WITH YOU AND THE FREEDOM LOVING PEOPLE IN MOLDOVA. GIVE HER A HAND ROUND OF APPLAUSE. ONE YEAR AND ONE YEAR INTO THIS WAR. PUTIN NO LONGER DOUBTS THE STRENGTH OF OUR COALITION. BUT HE'S STILL DOUBTS OUR CONVICTION. HE DOUBTS ARE STAYING POWER. IT DOUBTS OUR CONTINUED SUPPORT FOR UKRAINE. HE DOUBTS WITH HER NATO CAN REMAIN UNIFIED. BUT THERE SHOULD BE NO DOUBT OUR SUPPORT YOU FOR UKRAINE WILL NOT WAVER. NATO WILL NOT BE DIVIDED AND WE WILL NOT TIRED. PRESIDENT PUTIN'S CRAVEN LUST FOR LAND AND POWER WILL FAIL. AND THE UKRAINIAN PEOPLE'S LOVE FOR THEIR COUNTRY WILL PREVAIL. DEMOCRACY IN THE WORLD WILL STAND GUARD OVER FREEDOM TODAY, TOMORROW AND FOREVER. SO THAT'S WHAT IT THAT'S WHAT THAT STAKE HERE. FREEDOM. THAT'S THE MESSAGE. I CARRIED A KEEP YESTERDAY. DIRECTLY TO THE PEOPLE OF UKRAINE. WHEN PRESIDENT ZELENSKY SAID HE CAME TO THE UNITED STATES IN DECEMBER QUOTE, HE SAID, THIS STRUGGLE WILL DEFINE THE WORLD. AND WHAT OUR CHILDREN AND GRANDCHILDREN HOW THEY LIVE. AND THEN THEIR CHILDREN AND GRANDCHILDREN. HE WASN'T ALWAYS SPEAKING ABOUT THEIR CHILDREN AND GRANDCHILDREN OF UKRAINE. HE WAS SPEAKING ABOUT ALL OF OUR CHILDREN AND GRANDCHILDREN, YOURS AND MINE. OR SAYING AGAIN TODAY WITH THE PEOPLE OF POLAND. AND THE PEOPLE ACROSS EUROPE SAW FOR DECADES. APPETITES OF THE AUTOCRAT. CANNOT BE APPEASED. THEY MUST BE OPPOSED. AUTOCRATS ONLY UNDERSTAND ONE WORD. NO. NO, NO. NO, YOU WILL NOT TAKE MY COUNTRY. NO YOU WILL NOT TAKE MY FREEDOM. NO, YOU WILL NOT TAKE MY FUTURE. AND I'LL REPEAT TONIGHT. WHAT I SAID LAST YEAR, THE SAME PLACE A DICTATOR. BETTER NOT REBUILDING AN EMPIRE WILL NEVER BE ABLE TO E IS THE PEOPLE'S LOVE OF LIBERTY. BRUTALITY. WE'LL NEVER GRIND DOWN THE WILL OF THE FREE AND UKRAINE. UKRAINE WILL NEVER BE A VICTORY FOR RUSSIA. NEVER. FOR FREE. PEOPLE REFUSE TO LIVE IN A WORLD OF HOPELESSNESS IN DARKNESS. YOU KNOW, THIS HAS BEEN AN EXTRAORDINARY YEAR IN EVERY SENSE. EXTRAORDINARY BEAUTY PALETTE E. RUSSIAN FORCES AND MERCENARIES. THEY'VE COMMITTED TO PRIVATE EASE. CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY. WITHOUT SHAME OR COMPUNCTION. TARGETED CIVILIANS WITH DEATH AND DESTRUCTION. USED RAPE AS A WEAPON OF WAR. STOLEN UKRAINIAN CHILDREN. ATTEMPT TO STAY IN AN ATTEMPT TO STEAL UKRAINE'S FUTURE. BOMB TRAIN STATIONS, MATERNITY HOSPITAL SCHOOLS AND ORPHANAGES. NO. ONE NO ONE CAN TURN AWAY. THEIR EYES SHOULD BE ATROCITIES RUSSIA'S COMMITTING AGAINST THE UKRAINIAN PEOPLE. IT'S A PORN, IT'S ABHORRENT. BUT EXTRAORDINARILY AS WELL. HAS BEEN THE RESPONSE OF THE UKRAINIAN PEOPLE. AND THE WORLD. ONE YEAR AFTER THE BOMBS BEGAN TO FALL. RUSSIAN TANKS ROLLED INTO UKRAINE. UKRAINE IS STILL INDEPENDENT AND FREE. FROM KHERSON KHARKIV. UKRAINIAN FIGHTERS HAVE RECLAIMED THEIR LAND. OR THE 50% OF THE TERRITORY RUSSIA HELD LAST YEAR. THE BLUE AND THE YELLOW FLAG OF UKRAINE PROUDLY WAVES ONCE AGAIN. PRESIDENT ZELENSKY STILL LEADS THE DEMOCRATIC ELECTED GOVERNMENT. THAT REPRESENTS THE WILL OF THE UKRAINIAN PEOPLE. THE WORLD HAS ALREADY VOTED MULTIPLE TIMES. INCLUDING THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY TO CONDEMN RUSSIANS AGGRESSION. AND SUPPORTED JUST PEACE. EACH TIME IN THE U. N. THAT VOTE HAS BEEN OVERWHELMING. IN OCTOBER. 143 NATIONS. THE UNITED NATIONS CONDEMNED RUSSIA'S ILLEGAL ANNEXATION. ONLY FOUR FOR THE ENTIRE U. N VOTED WITH RUSSIA FOUR SO TONIGHT. I SPEAK ONCE MORE TO THE PEOPLE OF RUSSIA. UNITED STATES AND THE NATIONS OF EUROPE. DO NOT SEEK TO CONTROL OR DESTROY RUSSIA. THE WEST WAS NOT PLOTTING TO ATTACK RUSSIA, AS PUTIN SAID TODAY. AND MILLIONS OF RUSSIAN CITIZENS. I ONLY WANT TO LIVE IN PEACE WITH THEIR NEIGHBORS ARE NOT THE ENEMY. THIS WAR IS NEVER NECESSITY. IT'S A TRAGEDY. PRESIDENT PUTIN CHOSE THIS WAR. EVERY DAY. THE WORK CONTINUES IS HIS CHOICE. HE COULD END THE WAR WITH THE WORD. IT'S SIMPLE. RUSSIA STOPPED INVADING UKRAINE. IT WOULD END THE WAR. IF UKRAINE STOP DEFENDING ITSELF AGAINST RUSSIA WOULD BE THE END OF UKRAINE. THAT'S WHY TOGETHER. WE'RE MAKING SURE UKRAINE CAN DEFEND ITSELF. UNITED STATES. HAS ASSEMBLED AWARD WORLDWIDE COALITION. MORE THAN 50 NATIONS. TO GET CRITICAL WEAPONS AND SUPPLIES. TO THE BRAVE UKRAINIAN FIGHTERS ON THE FRONT LINES. AIR DEFENSE SYSTEMS, ARTILLERY, AMMUNITION, TANKS, ARMORED VEHICLES. THE EUROPEAN UNION. MEMBER STATES HAVE STEPPED UP WITH UNPRECEDENTED COMMITMENT TO UKRAINE. NOT JUST THINK IT'S SECURITY ASSISTANCE. BUT ECONOMIC AND HUMANITARIAN REFUGEE AND SYSTEMS AND SO MUCH MORE. TO ALL OF YOU HERE TONIGHT. TAKE A MOMENT. I'M SERIOUS WHEN I SAY THIS TURN ON, LOOK, TURN AROUND AND LOOK AT ONE ANOTHER. LOOK AT WHAT YOU'VE DONE SO FAR. FOLLOWING HIS HOSTING MORE THAN 1.5 MILLION REFUGEES FROM THIS WAR. GOD BLESS YOU. APOLOGY GENEROSITY, YOUR WILLINGNESS TO OPEN YOUR HEARTS AND YOUR HOMES IS EXTRAORDINARY. THE AMERICAN PEOPLE WHO ARE UNITED IN OUR RESOLVE AS WELL. ALL ACROSS MY COUNTRY. BIG CITIES AND SMALL TOWNS. UKRAINIAN FLAGS FLY FROM AMERICAN HOMES. OVER THE PAST YEAR. DEMOCRATS AND REPUBLICANS IN THE UNITED STATES CONGRESS. HAVE COME TOGETHER TO STAND FOR FREEDOM. THAT'S WHO AMERICANS ARE, AND THAT'S WHAT AMERICANS DO. THE WORLD IS ALSO COMING TOGETHER TO ADDRESS THE GLOBAL FALLOUT. FROM PRESIDENT PUTIN'S WAR. AND TRIED TO STARVE THE WORLD. BLOCKING THE PORTS IN THE BLACK SEA TO STOP UKRAINE FROM EXPORTING ITS GRAIN. EXACERBATING THE GLOBAL FOOD CRISIS. HIT DEVELOPING NATIONS IN AFRICA, ESPECIALLY HARD INSTEAD. THE UNITED STATES AND THE G SEVEN AND PARTNERS AROUND THE WORLD, ANSWERED THE CALL WITH HISTORIC COMMITMENS TO ADDRESS THE CRISIS. THE BOLSTER GLOBAL FOOD SUPPLIES. AND THIS WEEK. MY WIFE, JILL BIDEN. IS TRAVELING TO AFRICA TO HELP BRING ATTENTION TO THIS CRITICAL ISSUE. OUR COMMITMENT. IS TO THE PEOPLE OF UKRAINE. AND THE FUTURE OF UKRAINE. OUR UKRAINE IS FREE. SOVEREIGN AND DEMOCRATIC. THAT WAS A DREAM OF THOSE WHO DECLARED UKRAINE'S INDEPENDENCE MORE THAN 30 YEARS AGO. WHO LED THE ORANGE REVOLUTION. AND THE REVOLUTION OF DIGNITY. WHO BRAVED ICE AND FIRE IN THE BADAN. AND THE HEAVILY HUNTERS WHO DIED THERE. THOSE WHO CONTINUE STILL TO ROOT OUT KREMLIN'S EFFORTS TO CORRUPT COURSE AND CONTROL IT'S A DREAM FOR THOSE UKRAINIAN PATRIOTS. WHO FOUGHT FOR YEARS AGAINST RUSSIA'S AGGRESSION IN THE DONBAS. AND THE HEROES. GIVEN EVERYTHING GIVEN THEIR LIVES. THE SERVICE OF THE BELOVED UKRAINE. I WAS HONORED TO VISIT THE MEMORIAL IN KIEV YESTERDAY. FAKE TRIBUTE. TO THE SACRIFICE OF THOSE WHO LOST THEIR LIVES STANDING ALONGSIDE PRESIDENT ZELENSKY. UNITED STATES AND OUR PARTNERS STAND. WITH UKRAINE'S TEACHERS. IT'S HOSPITAL STAFF IS EMERGENCY RESPONDERS. THE WORKERS IN CITIES. ACROSS UKRAINE. OR FIGHTING TO KEEP THE POWER ON. THE FACE OF RUSSIA'S CRUEL BOMBARDMENT. WE STAND. BUT THE MILLIONS OF REFUGEES OF THIS WAR WHO FOUND A WELCOME IN EUROPE AND THE UNITED STATES, PARTICULARLY HERE IN POLAND. ORDINARY PEOPLE ALL ACROSS EUROPE. DID WHATEVER THEY COULD TO HELP AND CONTINUE TO DO SO. POLISH BUSINESSES CIVIL SOCIETY CULTURAL LEADERS, INCLUDING THE FIRST LADY OF POLAND, WHO WAS HERE TONIGHT, HAVE LEAD WITH THE HEART AND DETERMINATION, SHOWCASING ALL THAT'S GOOD ABOUT THE HUMAN SPIRIT, MADAME FIRST LADY AND WE LOVE YOU. THANK YOU ALL. EMERALD JUSTICE FOR WAR CRIMES AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY. CONTINUING TO BE COMMITTED BY THE RUSSIANS. YOU KNOW? THERE IS MUCH FOR US TO BE PROUD OF OVER THE ALL THAT WE HAVE ACHIEVED TOGETHER THIS PAST YEAR. BUT WE HAVE TO BE HONEST AND CLEAR EYED. AS WE LOOK AT THE YEAR AHEAD. THE DEFENSE OF FREEDOM IS NOT THE WORK OF A DAY OR EVERY YEAR. IT'S ALWAYS DIFFICULT. IT'S ALWAYS IMPORTANT. AS UKRAINE CONTINUE TO DEFEND ITSELF. AGAINST THE RUSSIAN ONSLAUGHT AND LAUNCH COUNTER OFFENSIVE OF ITS OWN. THERE WILL CONTINUE TO BE HARD AND VERY BETTER DAYS. VICTORIES AND TRAGEDIES. BUT UKRAINE IS STILL FOR THE FIGHT AHEAD. THE UNITED STATES, TOGETHER WITH OUR ALLIES AND PARTNERS ARE GOING TO CONTINUE TO HAVE UKRAINE'S BACK AS IT DEFENDS ITSELF. NEXT YEAR. I WILL HOST EVERY MEMBER OF NATO. FOR OUR 2024 SUMMIT IN THE UNITED STATES. TOGETHER. WE'LL CELEBRATE THE 75TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE STRONGEST DEFENSIVE ALLIANCE IN THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD. NATO LET THERE BE NO DOUBT. COMMITMENT TO THE UNITED STATES TO OUR NATO ALLIANCE, AND ARTICLE FIVE IS ROCK SOLID. AND EVERY MEMBER OF NATO KNOWS IT. AND RUSSIA KNOWS IT AS WELL. ATTACK AGAINST ONE IS ATTACK AGAINST ALL IT'S A SACRED OATH. SACRED OATH TO THE VENT EVERY INCH OF NATO TERRITORY. OVER THE PAST YEAR. THE UNITED STATES HAS COME TOGETHER WITH OUR ALLIES AND PARTNERS. EXTRAORDINARY COALITION. TO STAND AGAINST RUSSIAN AGGRESSION. BUT THE WORK IN FRONT OF US IT'S NOT JUST WHAT WE'RE AGAINST. IT'S ABOUT WHAT WE'RE FOR. WHAT KIND OF WORLD DO WE WANT TO BUILD? WE NEED TO TAKE THE STRENGTH AND CAPACITY. THIS COALITION AND APPLY IT TO LIFTING UP. LIFTING UP THE LIVES OF PEOPLE EVERYWHERE, IMPROVING HEALTH. GROWING PROSPERITY, PRESERVING THE PLAN OF BUILDING PEACE AND SECURITY. TREATING EVERYONE WITH DIGNITY AND RESPECT. THAT'S OUR RESPONSIBILITY. THE DEMOCRACY OF THE WORLD HAVE TO DELIVER IT FOR OUR PEOPLE. AS WE GATHER TONIGHT. THE WORLD IN MY VIEW AS AN INFLECTION POINT. THE DECISIONS WE MAKE OVER THE NEXT FIVE YEARS OR SO. DETERMINE IN SHAPE OUR LIVES FOR DECADES TO COME. THAT'S TRUE FOR AMERICANS. THAT'S TRUE FOR THE PEOPLE OF THE WORLD. AND WHILE DECISIONS ARE OURS TO MAKE NOW. THE PRINCIPLES AND THE STAKES ARE ETERNAL. JOYCE BETWEEN CHAOS AND STABILITY. BETWEEN BUILDING AND DESTROYING BETWEEN HOPE AND FEAR. BETWEEN DEMOCRACY LIFTS UP THE HUMAN SPIRIT. AND THE BRUTAL HAND OF THE DICTATOR WHO CRUSHES IT. BETWEEN NOTHING LESS THAN LIMITATION. AND POSSIBILITIES. KIND OF POSSIBILITIES THAT COME WHEN PEOPLE WHO LIVE NOT IN CAPTIVITY BUT IN FREEDOM. FREEDOM. FREEDOM THERE IS NO SWEETER WORD THAN FREEDOM. THERE IS NO NOBLE OR GOLDEN FREEDOM. THERE'S NO HIGHER ASPIRATIONS THAT FREEDOM AMERICANS KNOW THAT AND YOU KNOW IT. ALL THAT WE DO NOW. MUST BE DONE SO OUR CHILDREN AND GRANDCHILDREN WE'LL KNOW IT AS WELL. FREEDOM. THE ENEMY OF THE TYRANT. THE HOPE OF THE BRAVE AND THE TRUTH OF THE AGES. FREEDOM. STAND WITH US. WE WILL STAND WITH YOU. LET US MOVE FORWARD WITH FAITH AND CONVICTION. ABIDING COMMITMENT TO BE ALLIES. NOT OF DARKNESS BUT OF LIGHT. NOT ABOUT OPPRESSION BUT OF LIBERATION. NOT OF CAPTIVITY, BUT YES, OF FREEDOM. GOD BLESS YOU ALL. GOD PROTECT OUR TROOPS. AND MAY GOD BLESS THE HEROES OF UKRAINE AND ALL THOSE WHO ATTEMPT TO DEFEND FREEDOM AROUND THE WORLD. THANK YOU, POLAND. THANK YOU. THANK YOU. THANK YOU FOR WHAT YOU'RE DOIN|||FIRED A SHOT. THE DEPUTY HAS BEEN PLACED ON ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE WHILE STATE POLICE INVESTIGATE. MORE THAN 100 HOURS OF RESEARCH LED TO THE DISCOVERY OF A MONUMENT HONORING GRAND RAPIDS SOLDIERS TODAY. THE RELIC STANDS AT HOLY CROSS CEMETERY AND HOLDS THE STORY OF MEN WHO WENT BACK HOME TO FIGHT FOR FREEDOM. NEWS. 8. A LATE TELLS US ABOUT BEING REMEMBERED TODAY. >> MONUMENT HONORING GRAND RAPIDS SOLDIERS WHO FOUGHT IN POLAND IN WORLD WAR ONE WAS RESTORED TODAY. DECADES AFTER IT WAS BUILT. MY FIRST COUSIN ONCE REMOVED. >> BOLUS REACHING NOWITZKI SERVED IN THE BLUE ARMY TO REUNIFY POLL AND WALKING HOLY CROSS CEMETERY. YOU MIGHT NOTICE SOME NAMES STICK OUT FROM BIRTH OF HIS REAL NAME WAS MORE THAN 70 MEN FROM GRAND RAPIDS WERE A PART OF THE BLUE ARMY. THEY FOUGHT TO UNIFY POLAND DURING THE FIRST WORLD WAR YEARS LATER DURING THE GREAT DEPRESSION. PEOPLE SCRAPE TOGETHER, WHATEVER THEY COULD TO HONOR THESE MEN. HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE. >> LOCAL POLLS. AMERICANS CONTRIBUTED NICKELS DIMES DOLLARS. >> HONOR THESE MEN. AND AFTER YEARS OF SITTING THE MONUMENT BEGAN TO GET COVERED IN DIRT AND MILDEW UNTIL NOW. WE TO COME UP PRETTY GOOD. HOPE. >> THAT TODAY IS THE BEGINNING. OF MAKING THIS ONE OF THE MAIN FOCAL POINTS OF THE CEMETERY. >> WIPING IN SPRING AWAY YEARS OF DIRT AND GRIME. NOT SCRAPING AWAY THIS STORIES AND LEGACIES. THESE MEN LEFT BEHIND FROM THE LOCAL WHO SERVED IN THE ON. >> SOME OF THEM NEVER MADE IT HOME. SO THAT'S WHY IT'S SO COMFORTING. THE WAS A VIRGIN MARY WITH HER ARMS OUTSTRETCHED ESSENTIALLY WELCOMING THEM WELL. >> MORE INFORMATION ABOUT THE MONUMENT AND HOW YOU CAN HELP CAN BE FOUND ON OUR WEBSITE.|||-- THE POLITICAL LINES BARELY
BUDGED THIS MIDTERM CYCLE, THAT BUDGED THIS MIDTERM CYCLE, THAT WE HAD IN 2024. >>> LET'S TURN OUR ATTENTION TO THE WAR IN UKRAINE, THE ONGOING FALLOUT FROM THE MISSILE EXPLOSION IN POLAND. NATO, PULLING IN THE UNITED STATES SAID THAT MISSILE FELL IN A POLISH VILLAGE COMING FROM UKRAINE'S DEFENSE SYSTEM. THAT ASSESSMENT IS REFUTED BY PRESIDENT ZELINSKI WHO SAID THAT HE HAD NO DOUBT THAT IT WAS NOT A UKRAINIAN MISSILE. IT IS A CLAIM TO BIDEN ON HIS RETURN TO THE WHITE HOUSE AND FROM THE G 20 IN INDONESIA. >> WHAT IS YOUR REACTION TO ZELINSKI SAYING THE MISSILES THAT LANDED IN POLAND WERE NOT UKRAINIAN? >> THAT IS NOT THE EVIDENCE. >> ARE CORRESPONDENT JOINS US NOW. IT IS GOOD TO SEE YOU. THE PRESIDENT VOLODYMYR ZELENSKYY IS STICKING TO HIS CLAIM THAT THIS WAS  NOT A UKRAINIAN MISSILE. WHAT IS THE INVESTIGATION INTO THIS EXPLOSION? IS UKRAINE LIKELY TO GET ACCESS TO THE SITE THAT THEY ARE ASKING FOR? >> Reporter: IT IS AWKWARD FOR WESTERN LEADERS, THE WHITE HOUSE AND FOR UKRAINE. THIS IS A  DIVISION THAT IS
MADE PUBLIC. MADE PUBLIC. THAT IS NOT REALLY WHAT THEY WANT. WHAT THEY TRY TO DO IS MAINTAIN A UNITED FRONT AND RESPECT RUSSIA. HOWEVER, VOLODYMYR ZELENSKYY IS SAYING THAT  HIS OFFICIALS HAVE TOLD HIM THAT THIS WAS LIKELY A
RUSSIAN MISSILE. RUSSIAN MISSILE. HE SAID IT WOULD NOT MAKE SENSE FOR ME TO NOT TRUST THEM, AND HE SAID, GOD VOTED SOME MISSILES THAT KILLED THESE PEOPLE AND WE HAVE TO APOLOGIZE, BUT FIRST, THERE NEEDS TO BE AN INVESTIGATION. WHAT THE PRESIDENT OF UKRAINE
IS SAYING IS THAT THEY WANT IS SAYING IS THAT THEY WANT ACCESS TO POLAND. THEY ARE SUPPOSED TO BE UNITED, SO IT IS VERY DIFFICULT. ULTIMATELY THERE IS FRUSTRATION AMONG EUROPEAN LEADERS THAT UKRAINE IS TAKING THIS STANCE BECAUSE THEY SEEM FAIRLY
CONVINCED THAT THIS WAS A CONVINCED THAT THIS WAS A MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEM, POSSIBLY AN F-300 SOVIET-MADE MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEM USED BY THE UKRAINIANS, MAYBE THAT IS PART OF THE REASON FOR THE CONFUSION, AGAIN, IF IT WAS SOVIET-MADE, BUT FIRED BY THE UKRAINIANS YOU COULD SEE WHY PEOPLE MAY MAKE A MISJUDGMENT AT THIS STAGE. >> IT IS COMPLICATED. I WANT TO FOCUS ON WHAT IS HAPPENING INSIDE OF UKRAINE, THERE ARE REPORTS OF STRIKES IN ODESSA AMONG OTHER PLACES. WHAT IS GOING ON? >> Reporter: IT IS IMPORTANT TO REMEMBER THAT IT IS A CONTINUING WAVE OF AIRSTRIKES BY THE RUSSIANS. THAT IS WHY PRESIDENT  BIDEN IS TRYING TO PUT THE FOCUS ON IT SAYING THAT WHAT HAPPENED IN POLAND IS NOT UKRAINE'S FAULT EVEN IF THERE WAS A UKRAINIAN DEFENSE SYSTEM. THE LATEST NEWS THAT FOUR OF BEEN KILLED IN A DOZEN WOUNDED FROM DRONE MISSILE STRIKES AROUND UKRAINE. UKRAINIAN OFFICIALS SAY THAT THEY HAD SHUT DOWN TWO CRUISE MISSILES AND FIVE IRANIAN DRONES. THAT IS AN IMPROVING RATE OF SUCCESS FOR THE UKRAINIANS, AND PERHAPS THAT IS BECAUSE THEY HAVE NOW BEEN HELPED A LITTLE BIT TO BUY WESTERN DEFENSES. THE PICTURE IS OF AN ONGOING RUSSIAN OFFENSIVE OVER UKRAINE. PERHAPS WHAT HAPPENED IN POLAND IS SOMEWHAT INEVITABLE WHEN
THERE IS A WERE TAKING PLACE THERE IS A WERE TAKING PLACE RIGHT NEXT DOOR. >> YOU BROKE DOWN WHAT WE SEE ON THE GROUND, ON THE DIPLOMATIC FRONT IT LOOKS LIKE THE BLACK SEA DEALS BETWEEN UKRAINE AND RUSSIA HAS BEEN EXTENDED AGAIN, THAT IS BECAUSE WE KNOW THE WAR HAS IMPACTED THE FOOD SUPPLY AND GRAIN SUPPLY. WHAT CAN YOU TELL US ABOUT THAT? >> IT WAS EXTENDED FOR ANOTHER 120 DAYS. THIS IS A GRAIN DEAL, A FERTILIZER DEAL AND FOODSTUFFS DEAL. IT IS DAYS AWAY FROM EXPIRING. IT MEANS ESSENTIAL FOODSTUFFS COULD BE EXPORTED THROUGH THE BLACK SEA, WHICH OF COURSE IS PART OF THE WAR ZONE BETWEEN RUSSIA AND UKRAINE. IT COULD BE EXPORTED THROUGH THEIR TWO PLACES LIKE, FOR EXAMPLE, WHERE I WAS A FEW WEEKS AGO, WHERE THERE IS AN EXPANDING FOOD CRISIS. THE IMPLICATIONS OF HAVING THE BLOCKADE IN THE BLACK SEA WOULD HAVE BEEN CRIPPLING, AND, DESPITE THE FACT THAT THE RUSSIANS HAVE FIRED ON SHIPS, THE INSURERS WHO ENSURE THAT THE SHIPS ARE ABLE TO SETTLE WOULD LIKELY HAVE SAID WE ARE NOT GOING TO ENSURE THEM, THERE IS A RISK OF CONTINUED CONFLICT IN THAT ZONE. SO, IT IS VERY IMPORTANT. IT IMPORTANT BREAKTHROUGH WEST|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||How to renew your driving license in Wroclaw?  Hi guys my name is Darek Krasnicki and I'm  the leading certified physician for extending the validity period of medically restricted driving license in Poland. I'm so called the drivers doctor and the leading expert on this matter and more than three-quarters of foreign drivers who stay in Poland and re-apply following the expiry of their national licenses are issued with another license valid  not longer than four years. If you are going to stay in Wroclaw a bit longer it is wise to allow your driving license to be valid for a longer period of time and it should reduce the burden on you as an individual license holder. If this situation applies to you just visit my surgery in 215 Zernicka street in Wroclaw I don't usually see any problems if the maximum validated period for restricted driving license was extended even up to 15 years but before visiting my office you have to register online or by e-mail like Lekarz@Krasnicki.com.pl I repeat  Lekarz@Krasnicki.com.pl Lekarz@Krasnicki.com.pl or just call is (+48) 601 577 123 I repeat 601 577 123 and after visiting my surgery you can is submit my medical certificate to the Polish Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency and smoothly renew your driving license and then enjoy visiting Poland by your own car. If you like this video click the like and subscribe, share this with anyone you think might need my service see you next time|||JUDY WOODRUFF: But first: European Union leaders
have watched with alarm as Poland has reduced the independence of judges and the press. The E.U. has threatened to crack down on member
states that fail to uphold modern democratic values. However, as special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant reports from Warsaw, Poland's special relationship with the Trump administration
may encourage Poland's resistance to its European neighbors. MALCOLM BRABANT: "Free courts now" is the
clarion cry. Outside a courthouse in Central Warsaw, demonstrators
demand the removal of a judge appointed by the populist conservative government to replace
one of a more independent spirit. They accuse the country's justice minister
of being a judicial puppet master. MICHAL WAWRYKIEWICZ, Free Courts Initiative:
We are still in a battle for the rule of law in Poland, the rule of law that is dismantled
during the last four years permanently. MALCOLM BRABANT: Michal Wawrykiewicz is a
lawyer and founder of a campaign group called the Free Courts Initiative. MICHAL WAWRYKIEWICZ: Independence of judiciary
is one of the grounds of the democracy. If the courts are not independent and the
judges are not independent, then we have a very serious problem with the democracy. ELZBIETA JASTRZEBOWSKA, Archaeologist: We
are old enough to remember how it was under the Soviet regime. And, right now, it is incomprehensible to
me that this is repeated now, even worse. JAKUB KOCJAN, Democratic Action: The rest
of the world should be worried about Poland's democracy, because it's the model of Turkey
and Hungary, where judges are not independent, which really means dictatorship. ELZBIETA JASTRZEBOWSKA: Under the Soviets,
we normal people, we knew that the papers were lying, that the TV is lying. MALCOLM BRABANT: The liberal newspaper Gazeta
Wyborcza sprang from the venerated solidarity labor movement of the 1980s, pivotal in the
collapse of communism in Poland and across the former Soviet Bloc. But the paper is feeling the squeeze. Government entities have pulled advertising. Its reporters have been denied access. VADIM MAKARENKO, Gazeta Wyborcza: It's pretty
similar to America. The media are being demonized by the government. They're calling us fake news every time we're
being critical towards the government. MALCOLM BRABANT: Vadim Makarenko is a senior
editor at Gazeta Wyborcza. VADIM MAKARENKO We have state-owned television
which is bringing propaganda to Polish households. My newspaper appeals to the European Union
more or less regularly, asking it to preserve media freedom in Poland, as well as judiciary
independence. ZDZISLAW KRASNODEBSKI, European Parliament:
Based on the distorting and distorted image of Poland, I consider this as fake news of
this century. MALCOLM BRABANT: Zdzislaw Krasnodebski is
a member of the European parliament, and an influential member of Poland's Law and Justice
Party. ZDZISLAW KRASNODEBSKI: It is rubbish to say
that in Poland we have any slide towards autocracy or any danger, profound danger to democracy. Of course, our democracy is not perfect, but
I think British is not perfect and German is not perfect. MALCOLM BRABANT: Despite the concerns, Poland
of today is nothing like it was behind the Iron Curtain. There are no troops on the streets, and the
police did not disrupt the protests over the courts. Nevertheless, alarm bells are ringing. PAWEL MARCZEWSKI, Batory Foundation: I believe
what government is doing can be potentially dangerous. MALCOLM BRABANT: Pawel Marczewski is an analyst
with the Batory Foundation, established by American philanthropist George Soros to promote
open democratic societies in Poland and across Central Europe. PAWEL MARCZEWSKI: I do not believe that they're
offering enough space in the public discourse to dissenting voices. I think that they're trying to build a monolithic
political culture in Poland, a culture that is based basically on the Catholic faith and
a certain vision of Polish history, a very heroic version of Polish history, a simplistic
vision of Polish history. MALCOLM BRABANT: Such as the music of Frederic
Chopin, Poland's greatest composer and this key monument, the Warsaw Rising Memorial,
honoring 63 days in 1944 when patriots fought in vain against the Nazis. Behind is a modern battleground, the Supreme
Court. Last year, the Polish government forced 40
percent of the court's judges to retire early, in a move the European Commission condemned
as illegal. A change in leadership at the top of the European
Union in Brussels is now under way. And that could make it a lot harder for countries
like Poland to resist Pan-European laws and values. The new European Commission is determined
to stop what's been called democratic backsliding. So, in the future, member states will be subject
to an annual review to make sure they're abiding by the rules. In the 15 years since Brussels admitted nations
from the former Soviet Bloc, business in Poland has boomed, boosted by $14 billion worth of
European funds for state-of-the-art infrastructure. It's now the sixth largest economy in the
E.U. The implicit warning from Brussels is that,
unless Poland behaves, the money will dry up. But such sanctions have been threatened before
and, according to some E.U. officials, have had no impact. ADAM BALCER, Foreign Affairs Analyst: I think
that Poland is going to resist the pressure of the European mainstream. MALCOLM BRABANT: Foreign affairs analyst Adam
Balcer believes the governing Law and Justice Party will easily win this autumn's forthcoming
general election and will be emboldened as a result. ADAM BALCER: They are going to have more than
50 percent of the seats in Parliament. And, of course, they count a lot on the support
of the United States, which definitely, in the case of this administration, is very supportive
of this type of governments in the European Union. MALCOLM BRABANT: President Trump looks favorably
on Poland, not least because it meets his requirement that NATO members spend at least
2 percent of GDP on national defense. DONALD TRUMP, President of the United States:
The United States and Poland continue to enhance our security cooperation. Poland will still provide basing and infrastructure
to support military presence of about 1,000 American troops. The Polish government will build these projects
at no cost to the United States. The Polish government will pay for this. We thank President Duda and the people of
Poland for their partnership in advancing our common security. MALCOLM BRABANT: Poland is planning to buy
32 American F-35 Lightning stealth fighters, total cost, $2.5 billion. President Andrzej Duda was given a personal
flyover at the White House last month. And in what some critics label an act of outright
sycophancy, Duda intends to call the new American base on Polish soil Fort Trump. ANDRZEJ DUDA, Polish President (through translator):
One of the agreements I signed personally concerned security and military cooperation. As you mentioned, sir, there will be more
American troops in Poland. There's going to be an enhanced cooperation. MALCOLM BRABANT: So could the bond with the
White House thwart the E.U.'s intention to force Poland to conform? Building Fort Trump on Polish soil would have
a propaganda effect in any confrontation with Russia. PAWEL MARCZEWSKI: But I do believe this is
aimed at strengthening Polish position within the E.U., not as a serious alternative to
a strong Polish position in the E.U. MALCOLM BRABANT: This month, Poland has been
courting the leaders of Lithuania and Slovakia. It's trying to forge alliances within the
E.U. to challenge the dominance of France and Germany. If and when Brexit happens, Poland could become
more powerful within the E.U. The loss of Britain's moderating presence
could make it harder to stop the Poles from marching off the designated course. For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Malcolm Brabant
in Warsaw.|||Coal-rich Poland has the most
polluted air in the European Union. Every single person in
Silesia knows someone who basically died
because of the pollution. Yet many are
reluctant to depart from the tradition
and security of its pits. At the same time, a new
generation of climate activists are fighting to consign
fossil fuels to history. Our government has been one
of the most strongly blocking, all of the climate policies, plans
and ideas in the whole of Europe. But with the decline
of coal seen as vital to our hopes of avoiding the worst
of the impending climate crisis, what happens in Poland has implications
far beyond the country's borders. These two coal mines
are the last two slated to be open in
the whole of Europe. As a visual metaphor for
the scale of the problem, you've got a mountain
in front of you. Everything off? I need to eat more dumplings. I'm at the Jankowice of coal mine,
in the industrial Silesian city of Rybnik. One of the two mines not
scheduled to close until 2049. Easy to get lost. Before my visit, I had heard that high levels 
of methane emitted at the mine, might force its
closure much sooner. But 700 metres underground,
the prevailing mood is one of defiance. What happens when these
mines do close, what will you do? Yeah, yeah, OK. Get out the way. The return of this
trainload of miners from the coalface some
four kilometres away, heralds the changing
of a shift. How long will these men 
have been down in the mine? Six hours? There's a lot of men
working down here, will they all find jobs after
the coal mines close? Although the miners here
continue to extract around 2 million tons
of coal every year, Other miners in Silesia
have already experienced the hard reality of this
shutdown process. I'm on my way to Zabrze,
to the north of Rybnik, where the Makoszowy mine
has already been closed and is in the process of
being decommissioned. I'm going to meet trade union
leader, Andrzej Chwiluk, who has a bit of
a fight on his hands. It must have been incredibly
difficult for you personally to have watched over
the years this thriving mine slowly become
what we see today. This is my office. Ah, this is your office? What is the most important
thing you are looking for here? Andrzej shows me his
ceremonial uniform. A source of great pride in spite
of all that has happened. Looking good. And just in time to welcome
today's real guests. Here in Zabrze an unlikely alliance has
formed between Andrzej's trade unionists and these 'Fridays for Future'
climate activists. You've met Andrzej before? I was so scared of Andrzej. But on paper you
are enemies, right? They are being shown to us
by the government as those who are just opposing
any change and like, nothing can
happen here in Poland, because the miners
will just go crazy. The miners and the activists
have united over a concept known as the just transition. Which aims to create
a sustainable green economy, whilst also protecting 
workers and livelihoods. These people who
have to say goodbye to the way they've
worked for years. We really need to listen to
them and talk to each other and like find out what we can do
to finally achieve a just transition. Fantastic, good for you. I think we've all learned
something today. Yeah, all right,
let's go, go, go, OK. We've got to go. Andrzej is taking us
into Lower Silesia to a region where the closure
of the mines a few decades ago have caused a lot of problems
for the local people. What's your role here,
do you think? Our role is to inform the people
about, first of all, the crisis and to mobilise people for the
solutions and we have to figure out how to phase out coal in Poland. I want to understand what 
mistakes we must not do. Does this feel like a kind
of a fight back against the kind of divide and rule
approach to governance? The first time that we met
with Andrzej in Makoszowy, I remember we posted like on
social media that, you know, we're here, we're talking 
and then we put it out and people were like, what? That's insane. That's when it's so powerful, when we like, really believe that
justice has to kind of like, serve us all. During their visit to this
region, Wiktoria and Dominika are meeting miners, activists
and politicians alike, building contacts and
knowledge and of course, sharing their experiences
through social media. We're like in this moment of real
transition right now, in building the new. And this new system
can be amazing, but it doesn't require only
young people to build that, we need all of these
people on board. Despite the state-owned mines
resisting further closures,  houses that once relied
entirely on coal for heating,  are now being reprimanded
for contributing to some of the highest 
levels of air pollution in the EU. Back in Rybnik deputy mayor,
Piotr Masłowski, hopes this approach offers an
example of the just transition in action. We're following the municipal
guard on an eco patrol where they drive around
and look out for signs of things being burnt that
shouldn't be in households. I think that's a no. The city offers incentives
to encourage residents to move away from
their coal burners. With the older more harmful
smokers already banned. Oh yeah, look. Here in Rybnik there is a big movement 
to get rid of this type of burner and move to cleaner
sources of energy. But Poland's legacy of coal
isn't confined underground. What is this place? At this slag site, 
once a fishing pond, a local scavenger searches
for treasure amongst the refuse. What's this? Why do you feel it is that people
like yourself have to come down here to get your heating source? With energy costs driven
skyward by the war in Ukraine, this revolution away from
coal, once seen as vital to Poland's independence
from Soviet influence, is at risk of stalling
before it has even begun. You must feel some
responsibility to try and improve the lot
for people like this? No, I do not know his situation. I'm not sure we can
offer them new jobs. Generally I try to focus on the kids,
I know that it sounds terrible that I decide to leave maybe 
5% of the population behind. But if you want to achieve a goal
we have to invest in the future. But many local
residents are miners and as such still receive perks like
free coal to heat their homes. You are surrounded by
a strong mining industry and a lot of union members
who have no incentive to leave coal behind. Poland remains well behind the rest
of Europe in transitioning away from coal, with little cause for optimism
ahead of elections later this year, but places like Rybnik with 
more progressive local leaders are showing it is possible
to address the damage the coal industry has caused. And as miners and activists continue
to push collectively for change, there is a growing recognition that
when it comes to the climate crisis, we really are all in it together.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||  HE WILL BE THE FIFTH INMATE TO  BE EXECUTED THIS YEAR.  >>> THE WAR IN UKRAINE HAS  CREATED ONE OF THE LARGEST  DISPLACEMENTS OF PEOPLE IN THE  WORLD. SPIKE THE UNITED NATIONS  ESTIMATES MORE THAN 11 MILLION  PEOPLE HAVE FLED THEIR HOMES  BECAUSE OF THE WAR.  MORE THAN 5.5 MILLION PEOPLE  LEFT THE COUNTRY WITH THE  MAJORITY MAKING THEIR WAY TO  NEIGHBORING POLAND.  WITH MORE THAN 3 MILLION  REFUGEES TO CARE FOR, THE  STRAIN ON POLAND IS BECOMING úA  SOME REFUGEES HAVE REPORTEDLY  BECOME MORE WELCOME THAN  OTHERS.  >> JOINING US NOW TO TALK ABOUT  THE CRISIS IS A STAFF WRITER  FOR THE ATLANTIC, KATELYN  DICKERSON.  GREAT TO HAVE YOU WITH US.  FANTASTIC ARTICLE.  HE TRAVELED TO POLAND LAST  MONTH TO GET A BETTER  UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT IS  HAPPENING THERE WITH THE  REFUGEES AND THE PEOPLE HELPING  THEM.  WHAT DID YOU FIND?  >> AS SOMEONE WHO COVERS  MIGRATION, I SEE THAT NUMBER, 5  MILLION PEOPLE CROSSING INTO  ONE COUNTRY AND I KNOW IT'S  GOING TO BE A BIG DEAL.  NOT JUST IN THE IMMEDIATE TERM  AT THE BORDER WHERE PEOPLE WAIT  IN LINE FOR DAYS, IT WAS  SNOWING OUTSIDE AND PEOPLE DO  NOT HAVE HEAT OR WATER.  WHAT HAPPENS AFTER THAT?  I THINK IT'S MORE COMPLICATED  AND CAN CREATE EVEN MORE STRAIN. SOCIAL STRAIN AND POLITICAL  STRAIN.  YOU HAVE A MASSIVE GROUP OF  PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN  TRANSPLANTED INTO A COUNTRY  WHERE SOME SPEAK THE LANGUAGE  OR HAVE A COMMON LANGUAGE OF  RUSSIAN BUT THERE ARE A LOT OF  UKRAINIANS IN POLAND WHO DO NOT  SPEAK THE LANGUAGE THERE AT ALL  AND YOU HAVE TO GET THE KIDS  ENROLLED IN SCHOOL, HAVE TO  FIND JOBS THEMSELVES AND TRY TO  FIND A WAY TO MOVE FORWARD.  ON THE OTHER SIDE YOU HAVE  POLISH PEOPLE WHO HAVE  UNCHARACTERISTICALLY EMBRACED  VERY WARMLY PEOPLE WHO ARE  COMING FROM UKRAINE OR OF  UKRAINIAN ANCESTRY.  HISTORY HAS BEEN DIFFERENT FOR  PEOPLE WHO ARE IMMIGRANTS TO  UKRAINE IN A DIFFERENT  BACKGROUNDS.  WHAT I DID WAS OBSERVE THESE  GROUPS TRYING TO GET THROUGH  THIS CHALLENGE TOGETHER AND IS  DIFFICULT.  ONE HAD EVER POLISH NGO TOLD ME  THAT THE SITUATION IS A TICKING  TIME BOMB.  YOU HAVE HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS  OF UKRAINIANS, THE LUCKIEST OF  THEM THAT HAVE BEEN WELCOME TO  POLISH HOUSEHOLDS BUT AS IT  GOES YOU DON'T WANT TO  OVERSTATE YOUR WELCOME SO  TENSIONS ARE STARTING TO BUILD.  >> LET'S DIVE DEEPER INTO THE  POINT YOU MADE THAT SOME  UKRAINIANS ARE BEING EMBRACED  WARMLY AND OTHERS NOT SO MUCH.  THEY'VE HAD A HARD TIME  REACHING SAFETY.  WHAT ARE THE PEOPLE OF COLOR  DOING TO GET OUT OF UKRAINE AND  WHAT ARE THE PROBLEMS THEY'RE  FACING ONCE THEY LEAVE?  >> I WANT TO ZOOM OUT A LITTLE  BIT AND HELP PEOPLE UNDERSTAND  SOME IMPORTANT CONTEXT WHICH IS  THAT IN THE LAST COUPLE YEARS,  SIGNIFICANT, NOWHERE NEAR AS  LARGE BUT SIGNIFICANT NUMBERS  OF GROUPS LIKE SYRIANS AND  IRAQIS HAVE BEEN TRYING TO  ENTER POLAND THROUGH THE BORDER  WITH BELARUS.  THAT IS A COMPLICATED  GEOPOLITICAL SITUATION THAT  WITHOUT GOING INTO TOO MUCH  DEPTH, THE IMPORTANT POINT IS  THAT THE POLISH GOVERNMENT HAS  NOT WELCOMED THESE GROUPS.  MORE THAN TWO DOZEN PEOPLE DIED  WAITING.  THERE WAS A 1-YEAR-OLD SYRIAN  BABY WHO DIED IN THE FOREST  WAITING TO GET INTO POLAND  WHILE I WAS IN POLAND.  THE BORDER WITH UKRAINE WAS  COMPLETELY OPEN AND UKRAINIANS  WERE BEING ALLOWED TO POLAND  WITHOUT ANY LIMITATIONS AS LONG  AS THEY HAD A UKRAINIAN  PASSPORT.  THERE WAS A PARALYZED YOUNG MAN  BEING CARRIED BY HIS FAMILY  THROUGH THE FOREST AND WAS NOT  BEING ALLOWED IN.  AND OTHER TEENAGER THAT WAS  UNCONSCIOUS THAT WAS NOT  ALLOWED IN.  POLAND HAS NOT HISTORICALLY  BEEN A PLACE THAT HAS BEEN  WELCOMING TO REFUGEES.  POLAND AS A MEMBER OF THE EU  HAS BASICALLY STALLED  NEGOTIATIONS OVER REFUGEES IN  THE PAST BECAUSE THEY HAVE NOT  WANTED TO AGREE TO SHARE THE  RESPONSIBILITY TO HOUSE  REFUGEES.  THE EXPERIENCE OF THE  UKRAINIANS WITH UKRAINIAN  PASSPORT TO LOOK UKRAINIAN AND  SPEAK UKRAINIAN, THE  EXPERIENCES THEY ARE HAVING OUR  NOVEL AND FAIR BUT YOU HAVE  MANY INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS  THAT HAVE BEEN LIVING IN UKRAINE , PEOPLE FROM AFRICAN  COUNTRIES, MIDDLE EAST, SOUTH  ASIA AND THEY ARE RECEIVING A  RECEPTION THAT'S VERY DIFFERENT. IT'S MORE LIKE THE OTHER GROUPS  OF REFUGEES IN THE PAST HAVE  BEEN TURNED AWAY.  EVERYTHING FROM BEING VERBALLY  ATTACKED AT THE BORDER TO JUST  STRAIGHT UP BLOCKED FROM  ENTERING POLAND AT ALL AND  THOSE THAT DO MAKE IT INTO  POLAND ONLY HAVE 15 DAYS  LEGALLY TO FIND HOUSING OR  LEGALIZE THEIR IMMIGRATION  STATUS OR LEAVE COMPARED TO THE  18 MONTHS THAT UKRAINIAN  NATIONALS ARE GETTING.  IT IS A VERY DIFFERENT STORY  BASED ON ONE'S BACKGROUND.  >> GREAT REPORTING.  MAKE THE POINT AT THE END OF  YOUR PEACE, ANY REFUGEE  REGARDLESS OF THE WELCOME IS A  DEVASTATING CIRCUMSTANCE TO  LEAVE THEIR HOME|||E EXTRAORDINARY POWATCH. WEIJIA JIANG AT THE WHITE HOUSE, THANK YOU. VLADIMIR PUTIN'S INVASION IS THE BIGGEST TEST FOR NATO SINCE THE COLD WAR, AND TONIGHT, NOT FAR FROM WHERE WE ARE NOW, THE U.S. HAS STATE-OF-THE-ART DEFENSE SYSTEMS IN THE READY POSITION TO DETERT RUSSIANS. AND WE GOT AN EXCLUSIVE, UP-CLOSE LOOK. WE'RE JUST ABOUT 50 MILES FROM UKRAINE. >> THAT IS CORRECT, YES, MA'AM. >> O'Donnell: HERE AT AN NIRPT EASTERN POLAND, A NEW MAJOR SHOW OF AMERICAN FORCE, DESIGNED TO DETER RUSSIAN AGGRESSION-- TWO PATRIOT MISSILE BATTERIES, AMONG THE MOST SOPHISTICATED AIR DEFENSE SYSTEMS ON THE PLANET. FOR SECURITY REASONS WE'VE BEEN ASKED NOT TO NAME THE BATTERY COMMANDER OR SHOW HIS FACE. SO WHAT CAPABILITY DOES THIS HAVE? >> ALL OF THESE MISSILES ARE DESIGNED TO DEFEAT BALLISTIC MISSILES, DESIGNED TO DEFEAT CRUISE-TYPE MISSILES, AS WELL AS AIRCRAFT. >> O'Donnell: BY SHOOTING THEM OUT OF THE SKY. IF THE MISSILE IS INTENTIONAL OR JUST AN ERRANT MISSILE, WHAT CAN THIS DO? >> WELL, REGARDLESS OF INTENTIONAL OR ACCIDENTAL, THE SYSTEM ACTUALLY DOES NOT HAVE A MEANS OF DISCRIMINATING AGAINST THOSE. IT IDENTIFIES THREATS, AND WE HAVE THE ABILITY OF DEFEATING THOSE THREATS. >> O'Donnell: WHEN DID IT GET HERE? >> SO, THESE SYSTEMS HAVE BEEN ON THE GROUND A WEEK. >> O'Donnell: IT FEELS LIKE IT'S RAMPING UP. >> I KNOW THERE ARE A LOT OF TENSIONS RIGHT NOW. >> O'Donnell: TENSIONS HIGH AS THE WAR GETS CLOSER TOINATE'S DOORSTEP. A RUSSIAN MISSILE HIT A MILITARY FACILITY JUST 15 MILES FROM THE POLISH BORDER ON SUNDAY, AND LOCAL REPORTS SAY A SUSPECTED RUSSIAN DRONE WAS FOUND IN ROMANIA. IT'S NOT JUST THE U.S. ADDING PATRIOT MISSILES. GERMANY AND THE NETHERLANDS ARE DEPLOYING THEM, TOO. THE AIRPORT WE VISITED IS ALSO USED AS A WAY STATION FOR WEAPONS GOING TO UKRAINE. TODAY, WE SAW WHAT APPEARED TO BE A CONVOY OF TRUCKS LEAVING THE AIRPORT HEADING FOR THE BORDER. THE U.S. IS BRINGING IN MORE THAN JUST WEAPONS. THERE ARE NOW 100,000 U.S. TROOPS OPERATING IN EUROPE FOR THE FIRST TIME SINCE 2005, INCLUDING THOSE AT THE SITE OF THE PATRIOT BATTERIES. MAJOR GENERAL GREGORY BRADY IS IN CHARGE OF THE ARMY'S MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEMS THROUGHOUT EUROPE. WE SAW TWO PATRIOT MISSILE SYSTEMS TODAY. HOW WOULD YOU DESCRIBE THEIR STATE OF READINESS? >> WELL, WE ALWAYS ARE MAINTAINING A HIGH LEVEL OF READINESS. THEY ARE HERE, READY TO DEFEND AGAINST ANY TYPE OF AERIAL THREATS THAT COULD THREATEN NATO TERRITORIES. >> O'Donnell: READY FOR ANYTHING, AND ALWAYS ON ALERT. THEY JUST TOLD US WE HAD TO GO. THIS HUMVEE JUST PULLED UP AND SAID IT'S TIME TO LEAVE. TH|||welcome to the gingerbread capital of poland 
Toruń today we're exploring the town   we're gonna bring you guys on an adventure 
let's go we're going to make our own gingerbread   ah what else thinking cute is this oh yes 
i love it it looks where it's pathetic to Toruń, to poland and to all of you watching our channel. Na Zdrowie
this video is brought to you by the department of   promotion and tourism of Toruń we would like to 
thank them very much for giving us the opportunity   to show you this beautiful part of the world 
absolutely enjoy the video guys now the first   stop on our list today is the town hall tower we 
just bought ourselves some tickets here it's 21   złoty per person and we just found the 
entrance it looks very steep and dark   as you can see but i'd say let's just go in 
and try and see where this staircase leads us you have to be careful with your head 
and shoulders again yeah i'm gonna be   whacking my head again as always no news there nobody asked for our tickets so far   now, there's somebody that 
will probably check our tickets tickets were checked everything 
is in order we continue walking up wow need some cardio we definitely need 
more cardio it's getting hot today in Toruń   it is 30 30 31 degrees celsius so summer is here 
and inside this tower it's very humid because of   all the closed off walls obviously this place 
is epic we were wandering around the old town   last night when we arrived and we spotted 
some people up here on this tower and we were   like oh my god the views from the top of the 
tower must be really something to check out so   that's exactly why we're doing 
this now and torturing ourselves   to get up here and get some nice views for 
us and for you the things we do for youtube   so we're some way up right now and you seem 
to be in a bell tower of sorts check it out this town is one of the most spectacular 
looking places we really have not seen much yet   but this is really an authentic first impression 
this is literally the very first thing that we're   doing in Toruń so we're very excited very 
out of breath and very sweaty there's other   people coming down now so we kind of have to 
wait in order to go up um quite a bit of   traffic on the staircase and you kind of have 
to wait and see if somebody's coming your way   because you cannot go up if somebody comes 
down oh my god the staircase is so steep   trying to film while climbing up without 
falling down it's a bit of a challenge oh my god you made it all the way up bit 
windy up here it's nice though because it kind of   cools you down again wow you have 
the most amazing view up here   you can see the vistula river that's the 
river that also flows through Kraków i believe   we have seen this river there and other than that 
you can see the entire medieval town of Toruń   which is by the way a unesco world heritage 
the entire old town is a unesco world heritage excuse me please how beautiful is this building 
that we're currently looking onto and i have been   actually really interested in this building since 
yesterday evening when i first saw it it is from   1311 and it's one of these red brick buildings 
that just looks absolutely insane i think by now   it kind of looks like it's commercially used 
a lot of these like very very historically   looking buildings are used for museums or 
some sort of like cultural exhibitions or arts   or something like that this one specifically 
that i like so much is used commercially   but it is so nice to look at i genuinely can't 
think of anything more fantastic to do as a   as the first thing when we arrived here this is 
out of this world um by far already the coolest   tower that we've been on since we started 
traveling the views from up here are just   they just take your breath away i'm actually kind 
of almost lost for words just looking out at this and as naomi said unesco world heritage 
site the medieval town of Toruń this place   is somewhere that we have had on our list now ever 
since we arrived in poland and we've been getting   comments under our videos for such a long time 
saying you need to go to Toruń you need to check   out the medieval town of Toruń and that's why 
we came here we're here for quite some time now   we have a good few days booked in this beautiful 
place and we should be able to bring you guys   some really nice videos and sort of give you 
our true impressions of what this place is like   different things that you can do while 
you're here different things you can see   and there is absolutely an unbelievable amount of 
things that you can do a lot of them are for free   a lot of them you can buy tickets for but let's 
go and explore some more of this amazing medieval   town oh wow okay we're gonna take a little bit of 
a pit stop here at a coffee shop uh near to the   main medieval square of Toruń Menzen pub we're 
gonna grab a quick cup of coffee and maybe a tea   and just enjoy this beautiful day here for maybe 
an hour or so and then we're going to continue   exploring the great medieval city of Toruń 
we picked the absolute perfect place to drink a   coffee here we have a perfect view onto the statue 
of copernicus who was by the way born in Toruń   so a lot of the things here around the town are 
around copernicus so you have like i think a   copernicus museum and stuff like that so we have 
the perfect view onto the statue and it's just   such an idyllic and absolutely amazing day in the 
sun doesn't get much better than this guys this is   perfect right now now the city of Toruń is known 
for two things in particular nicholas copernicus   and gingerbread now those are two pretty random 
things but when it comes to Toruń it makes a   whole bunch of sense nicholas copernicus was an 
absolutely brilliant mind and he was someone who   basically discovered the theory that planets 
revolve around the sun and throughout history   he has been revered as one of the fantastic 
minds throughout history all throughout history   gingerbread on the other hand this place is known 
as the city of gingerbread and there's actually   a gingerbread museum where you can apparently 
go and make your own gingerbread so that is   on our list and we cannot wait to go and give 
that a shot directly here on the main square   of Toruń you will find this golden donkey here 
that was put here in the year 2007 and it is   supposed to look similar to the one that was here 
in medieval times back then however it was used   as a torturing method we read that soldiers like 
this disobedient soldiers were put on the donkey   with weights on their legs in order to torture 
them now it is a golden donkey where a lot of   people take pictures with and rub their ears so 
definitely a must-see of the city of Toruń right   now we are at the old gate of Toruń and this 
was erected in the first half of the 14th century   in a gothic style this is actually the only 
gate leading out of the old town to the west   and in the 15th century a barbican was built by 
it in the forum of a circular tower five to six   stories high so it would have been a fantastic 
viewpoint as a form of defense over Toruń and it   was strengthened with a moat and a drawbridge too 
missiles were actually hurled and boiling water   was poured on the besiegers through special 
openings on the protruding top floor gallery   the barricade was eventually destroyed the swedish 
armies during the siege of 1703 and the tower gate   was dismantled as well in the late 1880s so that 
there alone is a ton of history and this is just   one tiny part of toronto so right now there's not 
a whole lot of that gate left you still have some   parts of the defensive walls here directly behind 
me and the opening itself where people would have   come into the city or went out of the city and 
with a lot of imagination and the pictures that   are shown on the sign over there you can really 
imagine what this area would have looked like   if you walk a little bit further down you will 
find the leaning tower of Toruń which was built   in this very very specific way because one of the 
teutonic knights was dating the beautiful daughter   of a very wealthy merchant and he was not supposed 
to date this daughter or he fell in love with that   woman actually so to speak and it was built in 
this way because of his crooked ways of living   so right now we are at gate of the holy spirit 
or otherwise known as convent gate and this leads   directly out here onto the vistula river it's 
actually a perfect sort of a gateway between   the medieval town and the vistula river both 
ways both directions will take you to something   equally beautiful and stunning and if you do come 
during the summer which we highly recommend you   do come to Toruń in the summertime if you can 
because the weather is absolutely perfect and the   views out here onto the vistula river is just 
something else and then take a walk in to the   unesco world heritage site of the medieval town 
of Toruń and have yourself a little bit of   of an exploration around stuttering over 
my words but they used this gate itself to   actually hurl boiling water and hot porridge down 
onto their enemies or attackers of the fortress   can you imagine here you can see the original 
doors directly beside me and you can really see   how small people were back then like barely 
the original door barely touches my shoulder   i think i would have been too big 
for Toruń in the medieval times if it is getting too hot inside the city of 
Toruń you have obviously the vistula river   here on the side as well where you can do little 
cruises with these like cute little boats and   on the other side of the vistula river 
you can see there there's a lot of nature   and also small beaches and right now there's even 
people swimming there so i feel like Toruń kind   of has it all it has everything to offer that 
you could need for a summer destination i totally   agree with naomi this is truly the perfect summer 
destination if you are making a list add Toruń   to it immediately if you're coming here come here 
during the summer there is a beautiful very very   long sort of promenade all along the vistula river 
so i'd say there's nothing better than to just   take a nice walk on a sunny sunday or saturday 
afternoon and then stop off in the medieval town   and have yourself a nice cold piwo in one of the 
many bars and restaurants in there now gingerbread   really does run deep in the veins of the city 
of Toruń it is or what i've read is that   gingerbread was actually gifted to people such as 
pope john paul ii by far the best pope in history   if you ask me it is also gifted to plenty of kings 
and knights and nobel prize winners throughout   history as sort of sort of a sign of appreciation 
for the work that these brilliant people do   and to be honest i wouldn't be sad if i received 
a gift basket of delicious gingerbread for doing   a good job it's always very hard to get across 
just how beautiful certain places are and this   is one of those places where we just want to 
reach through the camera and pull you guys in   and just to let you experience the 
true and utter authentic beauty of   this polish city it is unmatched to be completely 
honest yeah walking the streets of Toruń   certainly feels like you're just walking in a 
medieval fairy tale kind of um i would love just   like for one day to put on like a princess dress 
or something and luke can be a knight for one day   and then we'll walk the streets here and have the 
most amazing day ever by the way if you ever see   us walking the streets of poland or in any other 
country don't hesitate and come up to us and just   say hello we're very very happy to speak to you 
guys and just grab a cup of coffee or something   somewhere definitely don't hesitate to approach us 
but now on to the gingerbread museum where we are   hopefully going to make our own gingerbread i know 
this is a gingerbread museum but how stinking cute   is this you have these little chairs that just 
looks like gingerbread with a little bit of icing   and you even have a massive gingerbread house here 
it's so cute so the gingerbread workshop that we   booked it is going to be entirely in polish 
so unfortunately we're not going to understand   the majority of what's going on but we 
figured we are just going to basically copy   what other people beside us are doing so it 
should be a fun experience nonetheless we cannot   wait to design our own gingerbread men let's 
do this okay so you can change the shape you   can go around choose what you like one mould 
okay so take the shape okay do you want to put It's a very special gingerbread because in Toruń we actually have  two types of gingerbreads so the first type 
is gingerbread for eating that you probably know   but the second type is a little bit different it is a  
traditional decoration type of gingerbread that is called   goście from the polish word for visitors and 
this gingerbread is just for decoration so not   for eating and we are making these gingerbreads 
like from the middle ages almost 300 years now   and this is really really important tradition 
in Toruń and we are not eating this dough   because in this dough there's like four times 
more flour and oil than in this normal one   so if you eat this probably a few 
next days you will spend in the bathroom after a week we can have two weeks they are 
going to be really hard like this so if you   will keep them safe for this time you can even 
have it for so many for many years in home i have   these ones that are like five years old now 
nothing is happening with them so every year   they're hanged on the christmas tree as a polish
tradition and gingerbreads like this you can also   decorate you can paint them with paints or some 
glue with glitter or maybe some more artistic like   decoupage fake gold decoration as you want but if 
you want to have this gingerbread for many years   probably better is to like conservate them 
with even a hairspray or some like a vernix for   decoration things yeah so you can try to do 
that because of course the worms also like food because our dough can stick to 
it we need a little bit of oil   and so when you take your brush you 
need to push it to the walls because   too much oil is not good because nothing 
will appear on the dough and you're gonna so it should be just a little shiny - just add a little bit of oil The Gingerbread comes from the Factory, where it is resting for 3 months before it is coming to us and so the dough is a little bit hard that's why we 
need to squeeze that because it needs to be more   elastic and a little bit sticky so you need to 
take that in hand and don't play though you need   to squeeze until the flour will disappear and 
it doesn't stick into your fingers okay so okay so you have to knead the dough until it gets kind of sticky as you maybe saw 
in the video in the beginning it had a little   bit of flour on the outside maybe if you can 
grab the dough over there so this is what it   looked like at the beginning and now it looks 
like this and the dough should be a little bit   sticky so that it kind of sticks to your hand 
and then it's ready to go because this dough   is coming from the copernicus factory 
from what the woman said and it's kind of   it's there for like three months until it gets 
here so the dough is a little bit hard and you   just have to work with it for a while until you 
can actually do something with it and okay so   this is a test when you squeeze it hard and you 
open the hand if it's sticky it's good if it's   falling it's not good but please do not do like 
this yeah your fingers cannot be in the dough actually this test is checking two things   if the dough is ready and if i can put you 
in the dungeons for you to make the gingerbread if your dough is sticky to make a ball from it one 
more time okay at least so it's more elastic and   our shapes we don't know how to hold our dough but 
it's sticky i think it will stick to this rolling pin so for that not to happen we need a little 
bit of our magical white powder so flour that's why we are going to put our 
dough inside the cup with flour   and just shake it okay and what will stick 
to it will be enough shake it shake it that's why it needs to cover only your 
shape and a little frame not the whole   mould and be bigger than mould okay because 
then you will need to start from over and   there is really important one 
thing when you will put your dough   on the mould check if your dough is on the 
right side not on the left okay right side oh god your gingerbread and somebody 
else's and i see a lot of hearts in here   and we need to sign our gingerbread so with the knife   in the center of your gingerbread you 
need to write your initials address so what what do you think of the experience 
so far you've got flower on your nose white powder on my nose no i'm only joking this 
experience is absolutely amazing and the lady   was so kind as well to do it in english and polish 
because there was not so many people around here   and i just think i don't know over the top 
happy i can't wait to hold my own gingerbread   yeah i went for the more 
traditional route of doing like the   um the stamp of Toruń or the coat of arms of 
Toruń and it came out actually it came out   pretty well i applied a little bit too much force 
when i was rolling on it but thankfully it came   out pretty good she's basically gonna go and bake 
our gingerbread now and this is not for eating   but there is a taste test somewhere on the first 
floor so we're gonna go and try some gingerbread   wait second gingerbread of the day we by the 
way we didn't have any food today we just had   a gingerbread that you saw at the beginning of the 
video and now we're going to have that gingerbread   it's half past four yeah we're living the staple 
diet of the people of Toruń it's gingerbread for   breakfast lunch and dinner some coffee in between 
we're getting up now to the tasting section of the   gingerbread museum and i don't know about you but 
i'm pretty hungry so let's get some gingerbread   excited for the gingerbread oh i'd like to make 
an emergency order of 10 kilograms of gingerbread   thank you for sure, no problem the moment we've all been waiting for 
we're gonna taste test some amazing gingerbread   you have your piece gingerbread this 
is called katarzynka by the way cheers to Toruń to poland and to 
all of you watching our channel thank you so much so nice i think my my gingerbread 
looks a little bit not so good well the weather is still amazing it Luke's words: pathetic let's inspect luke's shape here we go guys i don't know if you 
can see anything but there we go Toruń   nice not too not too shabby if you don't mind 
me saying didn't come out exactly perfect   but nonetheless this is definitely going to be a 
souvenir souvenirs that me and naomi will cherish   for a very very long time from this city now today 
we learned loads and loads of things but one of   the things for sure is that it's very difficult 
to make a nice gingerbread so definitely i have   to take my hat off for the people with my respect 
that make nice gingerbread because i am not the   person but anyway this is day one completed from 
Toruń stay tuned because we're going to see you   guys tomorrow this is a video that we're going to 
shoot over several days so i think we have another   like three or four days to come here in Toruń 
plenty more exploring see you tomorrow morning|||good morning peoples here from Zenowiz and 
you'd think we're in Poland already with   that name but we're not we're still in Germany 
almost the most northeastern part and there   on that tip lies Poland that's where we're going 
to go in a minute right up the coast for real this   time i hope into a country that i've never been 
to before with our companion of the last couple   of days so behind us the baltic sea that stretches 
all the way up to the baltic countries of course   also known in dutch as the Eastsea this is 
where the vikings roamed back in the day have you been polishing up your polish uh all right so let's get out of germany now and be the most 
north eastern i've ever been i think there we go   motorcycles are the best so let's go to the polsky so about eight kilometers from the polish border 
oh look at that and the architecture already   begins to change because look at this this is 
the cool thing about being out here because   you know used to be german used to be polish 
used to be german you know complicated history but also you know used to be eastern germany 
used to be soviet union we're going to see a lot   more of this in poland i reckon oh 
they built the elevator afterwards so more soviet blockish eastern blockish 
buildings poland is another country from   that soviet era because it was for a while 
occupied or a satellite state of the soviet   union and that's really cool in a way the 
historic aspect of it because i've been   in more than a few countries like that of 
course i've been to russia i rode all the way   to the eastern end of it vladivostok ventura 
romania hungary other countries in the balkans and   also georgia armenia there you can really really 
see that soviet era history some old machinery   the the vehicles the buildings and it's 
fascinating it's fantastic to see so i   always enjoy to see that soviet era history in 
those countries so we're going to see a little   bit more of that i wonder though on the coast 
because that's commercialized area of poland um   yeah every it's uh it's that time of the 
year again all the bikes are riding for it if we end up in a drag race i can actually 
win here this little bit of off-road after   that not so much i don't think she's stuck 
okay fair enough i wanted to record him going or maybe some uh polish viewers 
out there are like no man that's   still how we build but i can't 
imagine we're going to the prom i asked you uh to go to the prom want to come to 
the prom with me wait are these zlotties already yeah it looks like it wait are we in poland 
or germany i thought poland would only be   on the other side everything's in polish 
already when you get directly into poland   you can cross little river on a little ferry 
that's what we're gonna do there she is   and now we wait i think it's a time to brush 
up on our polish okay folks i was surprised   by my phone's text messages earlier already like 
you're in uh welcome to poland but we were already   in poland i thought it was only going to be on 
the other side of the river so we're in sweden sweeney yeah in poland but no poll inside well we'll 
uh have to get a rain check on that one i guess not very much how's that   [ __ ] oh yeah that's what i was gonna do i was 
gonna fire fire up the duolingo yupko is an apple correct see i know that was a boy oh man it's a man my polish still needs work oh [ __ ] it's time to go get on the boat nice you're all dressed up for the prom   suina can i pay a yapkos we have two we we 
have two yapkos you think so i don't think so we're on a boat yes we made it no more turning back we design germany it's quite a short ferry because we 
only need to get like over there we   haven't paid for the ferry yet but according 
to uh varuska she thinks the fairies for free   i said fat chance at first free fairy 
i think so yeah fairies aren't free   but uh it's free in a word if it is it would 
it would be the first maybe it's included in uh   the polish vehicle blasting nah i would surprise 
me let let peace we'll see let you be surprised all right quick before the prom ends a boy is eating an apple yes congratulations you 
know polish can you learn thank you before we   before we get off the get off the boat here 
all right thank you so we're already in poland   but i actually think that now we're really 
really really extra in poland we're off   the boat and let's see if there's a a ticket 
where you have to pay up like a toll booth no there's no such thing as free but i don't 
know who's paying but we aren't so it seems   i don't know if we missed a boof on the 
other side that this would be the first   free ferry i guess in my life out 
on the road anyhow polsky tuck yapko oh [ __ ] now i got bananas 
falling out of my tank bag   how do you say that in polish 
the fruits running amok attention danger one of those i need to learn hello in polish we've 
got a little road train here in mia   and i'm gonna i'm gonna 
bend the rules here a little hong kong ah bloody lovely feels good to be   somewhere new again i've never been to poland 
yet this for me is the eastern the real eastern   european expansion pack i wasn't expecting 
people sticking to the speed limit in poland   i'd be wrong now but i definitely 
wasn't expecting people staying under it beautiful got some really nice forests here oh i figured we 
would have been more at liberty here in poland ah   there's these paths that leave straight to the 
beach you're not even allowed to walk there   interesting where digging folks oh 
willy i don't have a lot of thread left   on that rear moxie that tire has suffered on 
highways but has been keeping up like an absolute   chap through that punishment but all good things 
come to neck i love this everything just changes   simply for me getting into germany already 
frees my mind freeze my whole being compared   to when you're in the netherlands i said it 
before there's no country more organized in   the world than the netherlands and then when you 
get to countries where everything just opens up   the architecture changes the way things 
are positioned everything is more random it   feels great good for the soul i like to say still 
always takes me by surprise a bit even though i've   experienced it so many times already first 
impressions up here in poland is uh at least   up here it seems to be pretty booming lots 
of building going on interesting to see uh-oh google you're wrong so let's get some lunch in us 
and figure out where are we going to settle for   a bit in poland apparently they have i think 
they have fish they have fish and chips here   you can have polish polish fish and 
chips welcome to sidewalk parking   you're getting good at that uh motorcycle 
uh live finger can you can you get out just squeeze in there i haven't gotten part to the part of duolingo 
where i learned what fishes mariska figured out   the menu i was just reading left to right and 
looking at a way is this german is this polish   is it a mix here because we're still close 
to the border but here we have polish   and here we have german basically polish fish 
and chips we're looking for cinco we got fish all right we're all fished up   how much is the fish the fish turned out to 
be a little bit more you pay by 100 grams hey let's roll ah this is the beach yeah this is the beach that uh would be at 
i guess this is all along poland the ribs beach days well we found a place for tonight and 
tomorrow we sort out the long stay   i already like it here better than uh the 
areas where you only had these villages and   little towns on the beach very touristy 
commercial these places are also   like that but you get some forests around the 
place too anyhow let's go to julia julia oh julia yeah you got big splats and i 
got mass huge splats two all over oh yeah don't don't we'll use a towel 
later all right clean you up at all   at our home we don't know that we have a new 
home again oh this helmet is full of sand   oh the whole mechanism oh that 
was brilliant who does that honey i am home all right bring it in 
like i said this one was going to be   spacious lovely 42 euros 
around this time of the year is this there i say a topper you're right there   doing some bicep training some upper body strength 
training things like the top or whatnot when   you're traveling with two people a kitchen becomes 
worth it this one's good let's come have a look so you got the usual cooking stuff 
yeah pretty neat right fridge   open up that one that's that's that's a first hey hey and then it was a new day 
once again gonna go on our way   to the place that we found we're gonna 
stay for a week which is nearby here you coming slow walk slow walk all right let's go stop messing around nice room oh yes that's one when the weights the 
weights the weights that's what we want   heavy free weights oh look at the big fat 
barbell there's plenty of those behind me as long as you've got barbell plates and weights|||GOOD EVENING AGAIN FROM WARSAW, GOOD EVENING AGAIN FROM WARSAW, POLAND. THANK YOU FOR JOINING US FROM THE NEXT HOUR. LET ME SKETCH OUT A SITUATION FOR YOU AND ASK YOU IF IT SOUNDS FAMILIAR. RUSSIA BEGINS AMASSING TROOPS ON ANOTHER COUNTRY'S BORDERS. THE UNITED STATES CALLS OUT RUSSIA'S BELLIGERENT MOVES AND WARNS IT NOT TO INVADE. EVERYONE IS ON EDGE. WONDERING IF RUSSIA IS ABOUT TO INVADE, AND IF SO, HOW THE UNITED STATES WILL RESPOND. I COULD, OF COURSE, BE DESCRIBING THE SITUATION LEADING UP TO THE UKRAINE LAST MONTH. BUT ACTUALLY, I'M DESCRIBING WHAT WAS HAPPENING RIGHT HERE IN THIS COUNTRY, IN POLAND, IN 1980. >> GOOD EVENING. POLAND AND THE POSSIBILITY OF SOVIET MILITARY INTERVENTION WAS THE SUBJECT OF AN UNUSUAL WHITE HOUSE DEMON THIS AFTERNOON. IN THAT STATEMENT, PRESIDENT CARTER SAID, THE UNITED STATES IS WATCHING WITH GROWING CONCERN THE UNPRECEDENTED BUILDUP OF SOVIET FORCES ALONG THE POLISH BORDER AND THE CLOSING OF CERTAIN FRONTIER REGIONS. THE STATEMENT ALSO SAID THAT MILITARY INTERVENTION IN POLAND WOULD HAVE THE MOST NEGATIVE CONSEQUENCES. >> SENIOR OFFICIALS ARE OPERATING ON THE ASSUMPTION THAT THE LAST THING THE RUSSIANS WANT TO DO IS INVADE POLAND, RECOGNIZING AN INVASION WILL MAKE EVERYTHING MUCH WORSE. BUT AT THE SAME TIME, THE RUSSIANS CONTINUE TO INCREASE THEIR MILITARY PRESSURE ON POLAND. FOR EXAMPLE, ON BOTH SIDES OF THE EAST GERMAN POLISH BORDER, A 40 MILE WARD STRIP HAS BEEN CLOSED TO FOREIGN OBSERVERS. THERE ARE TEN SOVIET DIVISIONS ABOUT 100,000 TROOPS IN THIS AREA. ON POLAND'S EASTERN FRONT, FROM THE BALTIC MILITARY DISTRICT IN THE NORTH TO THE CARPATHIAN IN THE SOUTH, -- FORCES ARE IN WET OFFICIALS HERE CALL AND ENHANCED STATE OF READINESS. >> THE CONSEQUENCES FOR THE PART OF EUROPE, THE WEST -- HAVE BEEN MADE CLEAR TO THE SOVIET LEADERSHIP. THERE ARE A NUMBER OF CHANNELS. >> THIS STANDOFF WITH THE SOVIET UNION WAS SPARKED BY THE SUCCESS OF A -- PRO DEMOCRACY HERE IN POLAND, A PRO DEMOCRACY MOVEMENT HERE IN POLAND. YOU WILL REMEMBER, IT THE SOLIDARITY MOVEMENT. IT BEGAN AS LABOR STRIKES IN A POLISH SHIPYARD AND QUICKLY GREW INTO A NATIONAL PHENOMENON UNDER ITS CHARISMATIC LEADER, LET VALENCIA. THE COMMUNIST GOVERNMENT IN POLAND BEING FORCED INTO COMPROMISES WITH THESE DEMOCRATIC LABOR ACTIVISTS. AND THE SOVIET UNION DID NOT LIKE THAT ONE BIT. IN THE END, THOUGH, THE SOVIET UNION DID NOT NEED TO INVADE POLAND. THE COMMUNIST POLISH GOVERNMENT DECLARED MARTIAL LAW AND STAGED ITS OWN MILITARY INVENTION. PROTESTS WERE BRUTALLY PUT DOWN. DEMONSTRATORS WERE KILLED. THOUSANDS OF OPPOSITION ACTIVISTS WERE IN PRISON. BUT THAT WAS NOT THE END OF THE STORY. ACTUALLY, IT WAS JUST THE BEGINNING OF THE STORY. BECAUSE THE SOLITARY MOVEMENT WAS NOT DESTROYED. IT OPERATED UNDERGROUND THROUGH YEARS OF REPRESSION, UNTIL IT BURST BACK INTO THE OPEN IN THE LATE 19 80S. AND IT FORCED THE GOVERNMENT INTO SOMETHING THAT HAD NEVER HAPPENED IN THE HISTORY OF COMMUNIST EASTERN EUROPE. FREE AND FAIR ELECTIONS. >> THE UNTHINKABLE WAS HAPPENING BEFORE THEIR EYES. POLLS RELISHED EVERY -- RESULT. ADDED TO A CRUSHING DEFEAT OF THE -- MASTERS OF POLAND. THE COMMUNIST PARTY. >> IT IS ONE STEP IN OUR ESCAPE FROM SERVED, I'M FROM COMMUNISM. >> SOLIDARITY COMPUTED THAT IT IS CANDIDATES WE COMPLETELY CONTROL THE POLISH SENATE, AND WIN EVERY -- SEAT -- THE OTHER HOUSE IN POLAND'S -- WAY. >> WE ALL MUST PREVAIL POLAND. NO MATTER WHO -- >> WITH THEIR FIRST STEP TOWARDS DEMOCRACY'S DEFENSE SUCCESSFULLY TAKE, AND POLLS DESCENDED ON THE CHINESE EMBASSY TO PROTEST THE REPRESSION IN THAT COUNTRY. THEY HAD CONFRONTED THEIR COMMUNIST PARTY AT THE BALLOT BOX. AND NOT A SINGLE DROP OF BLOOD HAD BEEN SHED. >> THE FIRST DOMINO TO FALL IN THE COLLAPSE OF THE SOVIET UNION FELL RIGHT HERE IN POLAND. THE LEADER OF SOLIDARITY, LIKE VALENCIA, BECAME POLAND'S FIRST DEMOCRATICALLY ELECTED PRESIDENT.|||- No breakfast for us, it's not even 7 AM yet and the KFC is closed - We've started the road trip to Olszyna at 4 to reach the Motopark. There we'll fight in the ULTRA4 race  - Good morning! You guys came for the mushroom picking? - No, how do we get to Kazimierz? - How's the road? - 7 hours of just sitting around. - Yeah, 2 hours of sleep - I've seen the rain cloud you've dragged with you though. - No way, it was here already - Let's hurry before it rains down on the camp set up - I was just watching your video with the AK4 team from the last year's race and they were crying because of the dust - We'll struggle with the mud for a change - It's getting brighter though.. - You see the fields over there? The track stretches 10 km that way - And here up the trees, all of it is track   - How long? - A little shorter this year but around 12 km - A 12 km loop? - Something like that  - We'll have to test our car before we hit the race, maybe today or tomorrow morning - This is a new challenge for us in the Olsztyna Motopark, beautiful location. The track looks freshly dug up and redone  - So that's the difference, in the last ULTRA4 in France it was just rocks - Very tight and full of stones when here it seems to have a lot of mud because of the rain - Couple hops, longer strips, slides and climbs  - Probably lots of rocks hidden in between. I don't know about any forest tracks  - Much more diverse overall. Let's get it! - Time to move along - Ultra has strict safety rules but it's made for you - It's not even a thing to complain about. They take a huge responsibility with checking us. The things I saw in the more amateur races... It's a miracle there isn't more accidents and deaths - You have to know that dying during the even less official rallies in Poland happens  - The river that drowned car last year isn't a point this year - You may ask why, this is a endurance race after all but the formula wants you to reach the end and not kill the car at the start - You drive in the water up to the roof two times and you're out of it. People came here to watch the show as well   - That's why they excluded it, as little water as possible - This will be the hardest track for the 4400 and legends  - There is a small muddy dip right here from the race and  the wheel size matters  - Based on their classification they should go with the track even with the obstacles|||[Music] today we set off to the capital of the West pomorskie void ship stretchin founded in the 8th century by Slavic inhabitants the area that eventually became a great city at prime location with access to both the Oder River and the Baltic Sea to this day it's one of the most important harbours of the country due to stretchin strategic location the city has enjoyed a rich at a times turbulent history and this is illustrated by the many landmarks that tourists can enjoy as they explore the first of which is the Royal gate behind me now a legacy of the Prussians when they really [Music] built in the Middle Ages the old market is still the main square of the city formerly used as a wheat trading point nowadays has become one of the most touristic spots in the city with countless cafes and restaurants in the area stretchin is famous for its regional products some of them you might even notice and shops in your country for instance there is a distinctive fish spread called paprika stead schinsky made from fish tomatoes and various spices the old City Hall is located on shouldn´t and Market Square and was constructed back in the 16th century [Music] you although there are no moats or dungeons there is a very charming castle I'd like to invite you to see between the 14th and the 16th century a chapel stood right here all that remains today are the outlines of its foundation but it gives you an imagination for how important religion was at the heart of the castle in the 12th century this region was primarily of the pagan faith yet Christianity was on the rise famously a bishop came here to baptize the region but the first baptism did not take he had to return two years later to rebaptised everyone here we are in 2019 and Stetson is rather Catholic I think the second baptism probably stuck [Music] so we are light in the Renaissance castle of Iranian Dukes which is the historic seat of the Griffith dynasty when it started roughly in 13 14th century and it lasts until 17th century actually it's one of the long living dynasties in Europe but we don't know much about it because it's not that famous well the first one is called virtue suave and he was Prince virtue suave and there's also a legend with the Gryphon symbol with him because he sent a soldier to the place where they discovered this nest of the Gryphon and that's why they called the Griffin says of the diversion dynasty that's why you can also see this in the clock there are some Griffin's there and the clock has a gesture maybe you can look after and he strikes the bells like hearings hours and quarters but actually there is a funny scary legend about him because he was ducal jester here in the castle and when he decided to scare the Duke because he was sick he actually scared him very much and he might found out of him and this couldn't be because he was a Duke and he was just a gesture should so they actually tried to execute him but the execution was fake and it was done with a sausage so it's quite a great story well not so great because their jester died because he died out of fear he didn't know it was this he thought it was real execution here and so he died unfortunately because of this about more crazy and actually scary stories we can go to the witch's cell soon and I'll show you this Danya and tell him sorry about Cydonia phone book she was a witch here [Music] she was a noble woman living here in the region and she fell in love with one of the princess well the Dukes son and they couldn't get married because it was a Miss alliance because she was just a noblewoman and he was a Duke son and she really got upset because there was a promise made of the marriage and she allegedly cast a spell upon the Griffin dynasty and it said within 50 years the Griffin dynasty will be wiped out yeah and actually the curse started working so they figure out that donia might be a witch so they try to execute her and they actually did and by the way execution did not work they still died out after that [Music] one of the most important events leading to the demise of the Polish People's Republic were the strikes of August 1980 the strikes resulted in the August agreements which enabled the official registration of the Solidarity labor union said trade union later played an important role in overcoming the communist regime of Poland even though the actual agreements were mainly associated with Gdansk the first of them were actually signed here in Stetson in 1970 the People's Republic of Poland started to see some cracks in their system some disgruntled workers signs of uprising and they swiftly tried to contain the situation by committing murder atrocities in various Polish cities Stetson was no exception to that this monument illustrates the gravity of the people who were lost in December of 1970 what really strikes me is the youth that was involved from the range of age 20 to 18 16 years old these were essentially people at the beginning of their life who gave a lot so that we could live in freedom one of the most popular legends about attention is probably the one about hidden treasure it's been said that German Nazis built of a small town under the city to keep their stolen treasures the location of the hidden town remains a mystery but there are still plenty of people trying to discover its riches for the seafood lovers I have chosen one of the best restaurants in Ch tension it is here that you can get a wide assortment of seafood delivered fresh on a daily basis directly from Berlin in fact I've chosen tuna steaks but the menu is huge there's lobster mussels clams oysters salmon and so on let's check it out tuna is a really fun protein because it takes on flavor well and it doesn't need a lot of seasoning to be flavorful root full if you will metaphorically speaking so without the sauces I can tell you that it tastes a little bit Carla see there's a little bit of butter touch a salt a bit of pepper but it's perfect as a meat when you start to take the sauces on the flavor goes up a notch for sure and I actually could eat the fish as it is but this this is but this is ideal in my opinion for people who are not into fish and once almost disguised the flavor of it this is nice this is a pepper sauce and here we have the cream dill sauce and these sauces are ideal for people who might be a little bit squeamish about eating fish especially fish that is raw on the inside it helps to disguise the texture and the flavor I fortunately happen to love tuna seared so I don't need the sauce at all [Music] this Philharmonic's grand reception hall will leave you breathless not only that it is a functional space it doubles as a cinema and a concert hall with very very capable acoustics it's glorious this modern structure was built in 2014 and quickly became an architectural icon of the city the four floors of the Philharmonic are occupied not only by concert halls but also by art galleries a cafe a spacious Lobby and a foyer this Symphony Hall has provided an exceptional acoustic experience to countless music lovers the exterior facade of the building is unusually white resembling an iceberg [Music] what a fascinating concept the place that you come to witness art is in it of itself a piece of art yet it is highly functional and technological in fact those acoustic panels surrounding me adjust at the press of a button to accommodate the Preferences of the performer and many different performers have passed through here from jazz to symphonic to even electronic music [Music] we now find ourselves in this small gallery and it's a precious little space but it has one oddity in contrast to the rest of this facility a window see the Philharmonic inch section only features three windows so you have to enjoy the rarity while you can [Music] st. James Cathedral is one of the tallest in Poland and it was built between the 12th and 15th century after World War two it was badly damaged it actually sat in ruins until the 1970s believe it or not today as you can see they're still doing reconstruction work but it offers a fantastic view for the end of this episode that chin has caused me to slightly recalibrate my expectations and imagination for what Polish city is visually speaking and considering its great distance from other major cities you kind of feel as if you're on an island I enjoyed myself greatly hope to come back here and I hope that you will do the same and until then I'm Ryan so cash for London [Music]|||if you had to say something about Poland it 
would be probably either vodka stealing cars or   getting invaded so today I'll dive into why Poland 
keeps getting invaded examining the geographical   political and cultural reasons including examples 
and explanations hey Slavic Vikings and welcome to   another video about Poland I have lived in Poland 
for 13 years and you can feel the cultural impact   of all the past suffering inflicted on This Nation 
there is a deep resentment in the Polish mentality   I talk more about this in a video in the corner 
now Poland was founded in 966 by mishko the first   it was getting invaded before it even existed 
for example Otto the first in 963. since then   Poland has been going through constant Wars almost 
every year for hundreds of years during the Middle   Ages Poland wanted to incorporate other fellow 
West Slavic peoples under the rule of Polish   Dukes such as the earlier mentioned mieshko the 
first and then defend the lands acquired in the   west from the Holy Roman Empire for much of its 
early history as a Christian State Poland had to   contend with Pomeranians prussians lithuanians and 
other Baltic peoples in a continuous Border Wars   without clear results or end inside however after 
their Teutonic order conquered and assimilated   depressions it began incursions into polish and 
Lithuanian territories this represented a far   greater threat to both Poland and Lithuania and 
the two countries United in a defensive Alliance   the 17th century saw Fierce rivalry between the 
then major Eastern European powers Sweden the   Polish Lithuanian Commonwealth and the Ottoman 
Empire at its peak the Commonwealth compromised   the territories of present-day Poland and large 
parts of Ukraine Belarus Lithuania Latvia Estonia   and Russia and represented a major European power 
however because of bad political policy liberun   veto by the end of the 18th century a series of 
internal conflicts and wars with foreign enemies   led to the dissolution of the Polish Lithuanian 
Commonwealth and this slow partitioning of Poland   making Poland completely disappear from the 
map for the first time in my opinion liberun   veto had a considerable impact on the first three 
partitions of Poland and it's a good example of   political reasons for its collapse liberun veto in 
a nutshell is where a member of The Government Can   overthrow any new potential ruling by declaring 
the law this law was in use technically for   hundreds of years but only towards the end of the 
Commonwealth they did become a problem because   of Corruption of members getting bribes from 
other country diplomats and group in fighting   pose unsuccessfully struggled to win back their 
independence throughout the 19th century at first   they put their hopes into Napoleon later they 
tried to ignite National uprisings every now   and then most of them bloodly repressed in the 
turmoil of the first world war polls regained   independence and expanded their territories 
in a series of local Wars and uprisings they   even managed to push the Soviets Union quite 
far the Polish Independence was not for long   since just a few years later the German Nazis 
and Soviet Russians invaded Poland once again   making Poland disappear from them up after the 
Axis powers lost Poland technically regained its   independence as a communist Russian puppet state 
but many posts don't see their independence until   the last Russian troops left polish soil in 
1993. the first and most obvious reason Poland   is so attractive for foreign invasion is its 
geography other than the Carpathian Mountains   in the South and historical small Coastline in 
the north the entirety of Poland is located in   the great European Plain and most of its borders 
weren't even set on Rivers only the newest borders   after World War II uses Rivers as borders most of 
the Polish landscape is flat fields which are the   perfect environment for Invasion Russia may have 
similar geography but they can infinitely Retreat   which Poland can't do another big reasons 
that are less covered are political reasons   Poland historically likes to be non-aligned 
or Ally itself with Far Away Western powers   that don't end up helping Poland when they need it 
the first example is Poland trusting Napoleon with   the liberation of Poland the second is Poland 
putting their faith in the allies during World   War II right now Poland is basically trusting 
the U.S to defend it in potential Invasion so   let's hope that the third times the charm and 
Poland won't get abandoned this time although it   did not seem like Poland was gonna get left by the 
U.S when Ukrainian missiles recently hit polished   soil thinking it was the Russians polish culture 
also does not help to prevent Poland from getting   invaded there is a big difference between being 
neutral and non-aligned the Way Poland is and was   not aligned is that they don't like aligning with 
other bordering Powers but they won't Prevail from   using a situation to their advantage by invading 
a country in trouble so for those reasons Poland   has gone through a lot of suffering but how did 
this impact fall in I covered how it impacted the   Polish mentality but it has also impacted Poland 
in a more visible way because so many big Wars   have been on polish land polish infrastructure 
and Industry have suffered a lot all the battles   are a primary reason why Germany is so much richer 
than Poland Germany has easier borders to defend   Poland during World War II has a choice to make 
they knew they had no chance against the Germans   but they fought them to the very end anyway 
exploding factories and any industry the Germans   could use after they capitulated polish chose 
culture over economic prosperity France after   seeing the extreme destruction of Poland realizing 
that they were seeing an impending similar fate as   Poland they surrendered in practice saving French 
architecture and their future economic prosperity   Denmark also fought a symbolic war against 
the Germans before deciding it was not worth   destroying Denmark Poland after World War 
II was under the protection of the Communist   USSR after the USSR collapsed Poland lost its 
defensive Alliance and shortly after joined NATO   theoretically Poland is now safe from Invasion 
because of the alliance and seems to be defined   modern polish diplomacy 1.1 percent of my viewers 
are subscribed so if you want more of these videos   please consider subscribing and leave Insight 
in the comments the reason why the Polish gets   so much invaded is a combination of bad tactical 
political decisions and just about luck yesterday and as always and goodbye|||are you renting a flood in poland or maybe you are about to sign an agreement today i will tell you about a very important and quite difficult thing the real estate and rental laws in poland what are the obligation of the landlord and the tenant what official rules you have to follow and how to protect yourselves stay with me and you will know all the answers [Music] law is tough thing i know the official language raised a lot of doubts and questions but here comes our explanation in the easiest possible way with our guide you will finally understand it let's start with the most important thing from your perspective as a tenant duties of landlord and the tenant of course both ladders and tenants have their responsibilities it's good to know what you can demand but also what rules you have to follow let's go for the most important ones maintenance and repairs according to polish law the landlord is responsible for all the mechanicals and appliances in the building and in the apartment that allows you to use things like electricity water heating elevator gas but what does it exactly mean in other easier words he takes care of the maintenance of central heating plumbing electrical installation he is doing all the necessary repairs and the costs are on his side before you move in the landlord is responsible to check the apartment and make all the repairs of course things wear out over time and the lander has to prepare the flat for the next tenant as i mentioned in a previous video you cannot be charged for the regular wear and tear but the term regular wear and turn must be clarified if the pot is burnt the pan is squashed so the teflon is off or the couch is so dirty that it cannot be clean it's not a regular wear and tear the lander has the full right to charge you for the replacement i know that the dirty couch can still be used but put yourself in the place of a new tenant would you really like to rent a flat with a dirty couch not to mention that the burned pot is dangerous for your health let's give more examples if the heating system stops working the ladder has to come and fix it and costs are on his side also if the fridge or oven stops working because it's old the lantern has to replace it and the costs are also on his side if the flooring in your apartment breaks just because it's low quality is not your fault but if you drop something and make a hole you have to pay for the reaper what about the building its surroundings and the staircase all owners of the apartment in the building creates a whole owner's association called spunota mieshkanyova your landlord is part of it and has some influence on that but he cannot repair anything on its own in the building right away for example if the salvage system in the building is clogged the homeowner association has to organize plumbers and pays for the repairs your lander should inform you right away about the problem but he cannot fix it on his own here same as in the apartment if you damage something in the building or staircase you have to pay for the repairs so remember you are responsible not only for your apartment but the building as well changes in the apartment interior design what about changing anything in the apartment well be prudent and upgrade ulef in polish can only be done with the written permission of the android well not everything is an upgrade for example if you are changing a painting in a frame or hanging blinds just keep the original ones it's not an upgrade as it doesn't increase the value of the flat and it's easy to remove however if you plan to do something bigger like painting walls or hanging a shelf as you make holes in a wall you must have a written permission of the language according to polish law after ending the lease flat must be in the same condition as at the beginning well it's easy to say but how to do this first of all be consistent clean the flood regularly and maintain it in a good condition for carpets furniture etc if something breaks let your laundry know right away the kettle won't magically repair itself and at the beginning it can be easier and cheaper to repair before the damage gets worse when you know the move out date prepare the flat of course you have to take all your belongings but also throw out trash clean cabinets furniture toilet and everything else not only on the outside but also on the inside don't forget to clean the windows if you don't do it properly your ladder can ask you to pay for an extra cleaning service if during the lease you replaced or repaired something you have the right to get the refund but only in case you have the written permission of the landlord if you replace something without his knowledge he doesn't have to keep things you bought and you have to take them when moving out so please always ask the landlord first now let's talk about very important issue which is rental pricing trees can the android change the rental price during the rental time the answer is yes but he has to inform you in written form no longer than on the last day of the month you have the right to keep the rental increase notice the provisional staff key change it's not the same as the rental termination notice the termination notice is usually three months or it can be longer if the list says so then you have two months to let him know if you don't agree to the increase you have to move out for example if the rental increase is announced from the 1st of february your rental increase notice is calculated from the 1st of november till the 31st of january full 3 months the lender has to provide you with determined rental increase notice by the end of october by the end of december you have to let the landlord know that you don't agree for the increase then by the end of january you have to move out the another has arrived to increase the rental price maximum once every six month but please remember that it only applies to the rental price not the advanced monthly payment for the utilities if the city increased the charge of the waste disposal three times a year the lender has right to increase it too important in poland paper is a must well you don't need the written correspondence with your landlord it can be done via email but when it comes to important documents like ending the contract or signing an annex it must be done on paper with your hand-written signature by your hand no copy and paste or created in a computer program signature is not valid early contract termination is it even possible both the landers and the tenant have a right to end the contract earlier but under a certain conditions as i said in the previous video before you sign the lease as your lender if it's possible to end the contract earlier in general according to polish law the lease with a termination date cannot be entered before its date you can do it if you have a contract without a stated termination date in this case you can end the contract with a three months termination notice but be careful your lender can end the contract earlier if you are not paying the rent you don't in the apartment and in general you don't care about it you sublease the apartment you party a lot and your neighbors complain the building you live in needs to be torn down or renovated i know these are some extreme situation but i want you to know insurance insurance is a very important thing that we usually don't think about but it's good to have it of course your landlord will or at least should have some thanks to that you are protected from unexpected events like a broken washing machine in your neighbor's flat that floats your apartment however you can also ensure yourself from the damage that you caused or something unexpected happen for example breaking a glass door shower or a theft the insurance is called civil liability insurance and it's relatively cheap compared to the damage that you can make highly recommended not a react your landlord can ask you to sign an agreement in the form of notary act and there is nothing to be afraid about i know that you're an honest and responsible person so don't stress when the lender suggests signing and not react usually he is the one who prepares everything he will set up a date find the translator and probably he will pay for that i will only tell you that we have two types of notary act occasionally when you as a tenant sign a contract with a private person and institutional lease when your landlord is a company here are some other useful pieces of information the lander cannot enter the apartment without your permission during the lease however the lisa agreement can indicate the periodical inspections in your presence exception in the urgent and dangerous case the ladder can enter your apartment without your permission or presence but only with the policeman as a foreigner you may not want to pay in polish zloty you can ask another if it's possible to pay in different currency like euros or u.s dollars a private owner should may not give you such a possibility but the company should have if you need some more help you can always ask the rental agency but remember it's connected with the commission fee it is usually a month friend plus 23 of tax but remember not all the companies are rental agencies some of them owns the apartments so we don't pay for the commission fee if you are not sure if the person renting the apartment is entitled to do so you can always check it in your land and mortgage register number exchange how to do this check out our guide the link is in the description okay guys now i think you know everything about renting an apartment and nothing should surprise you of course if you have any questions or want me to talk about anything in particular leave a comment don't forget to subscribe to our channel and stay tuned for our next video see you next time [Music] you|||It's great having Amazon's hub close to our facilities,  with products from all over Europe, ready and packed for when we need them. KTW1 Humanitarian Hub in Poland I've been at Amazon since forever. What we're doing now is really special. The area we are currently in is dedicated for our support for Save the Children. It spans 3,500 sq. m. and can store as many as 1,500 pallets. This gives a total of over a million products This is the first shipment for Save The Children organization. This is an especially important shipment  as it's the very first one in the history of our partnership as an international hub supporting humanitarian foundations. We are now in Zabierzów where Amazon's first shipment of goods for Save the Children is being unloaded to help our friends from Ukraine. I'm happy to be here as part of my job, to be able to help. Thanks to Amazon and a collaboration between the local government and Eximius Park we're able to provide supplies and goods for Ukrainian children and their families.|||[Music] welcome back to Jetline Marvel for 
another thrilling Aviation episode the first Korean fa-50 light attack aircraft 
designated for export to Poland was unveiled   in a ceremony on Wednesday that emphasized the 
two Nations expanding defense sector ties [Music]   company had the rollout ceremony of 
fa-50 at its headquarters insatian the rollout ceremony is significant as this is the 
first chance to disclose the actual aircraft that   remained on the drawing to the General Public 
the ceremonies theme firm commitment secure   future symbolizes both Poland and the Republic of 
Korea's dedication to upholding their respective   Sovereign airspaces and The Cordial relationship 
between the two Nations [Music] fa50 used the name   fa-50gf Gap filler as it will function to fill 
Poland's strategic gaps by swiftly replacing the   Aging air fighters in Poland and having new ones 
on track for military missions in a timely manner   after the flight test by the end of July 
fa50 GF will be provided starting in August   the first 12 fa-50 GFS are scheduled to 
be delivered by the end of 2023. [Music] according to the contract Korean Aerospace 
Industries is scheduled to consecutively   provide 36 fa 50pl Poland out of the maximum 
contract number of 48 between the second half   of 2025 and 2028 which is the upgraded 
version of fa50 with the highest level   of specifications by reflecting the needs and 
the requests from the Polish Air Force [Music]   proving its active electronically scanned 
array air to surface and air-to-air missiles   and expanding its range through aerial refueling 
the fa-50pl is equipped with improved overall   functionalities that are projected to Aid 
in the development of the Polish Air Force   the fa50pl is a combat aircraft capable of 
performing a variety of tasks such as special   tactics and fighter responsibilities because 
of its excellent interoperability with the   F-16 the fa50pl is ideal for fighter 
training for fifth generation planes   such as the F-35 which is projected to play 
a key role in the Polish Air Force [Music] thanks for watching please share your thoughts 
about the fa-50 aircraft in the comments section|||Hello friends today we talk about very important subject from my point of view what is the most than euro thing in Poland I am from another country so many things in Po in Poland people think it's europeo for me it's very very Weir and the UN Euro weed what country you from China China Asian country the culture are so different so I have a lot of culture shock I'm going to tell you this today and since today's video is a talking video we have to prepare some drink yeah leer okay I'm prepared today all right like French people they bring their wine everywhere and German people take their people a beer everywhere Polish people take vertica everywhere this is not Li we don't have vka we take liquor everywhere so this is a caramel taste lior right and it's a gift from our friends usually we don't drink aloh at home and it's interesting to try polish Le because they have different tast let's try this [Music] first it's quite good nice okay so let's start our first first point what is the very unur in Poland I think Polish people are are not afraid of coldness they don't feel what did I say ah so let's start talk about are you drunk Polish people we soow little to clothes you know I observe that through the whole year except for the hottest days I always wear two times three times more cloth more clothes than Polish people in the street like 10° I still see people walking with a sh so I I always wear a lot of clothes and at the same time my husband this one he he always say so hot so hot thinking oh my God what's wrong with him and and especially in the night my feet are so cold and I have to hug him to steal heat from him but he's like a like a heat ball is always and me it heat so it's good that we have something I don't need any I don't need the hot water what what is it called that you know you can put the hot water inside this thing and hold this the kindest people like it so so in other words your shock is that I'm hot you and many other people you didn't try other people do I have to try I can see that they when I'm shaking in the coldness they don't feel anything okay they have a very thin blouse and and short [Music] t-shirt so let's talk about the second thing so second thing for me I think it's weird to see at films movies from from another country at the Polish people will make it lectors they call it the lect so it's like the movie are in original sound but there is a person a man a male voice reading the Polish subtitle there are no subtit without emotion that's very weird very weird for me like I cannot get used to this so it's not a dabbing there is original sound yes original dialoges yeah can hear them in language but besides of this there is a Polish lecto talking in Polish there are no subtitles in Polish yeah sometimes they are writing so so I don't I don't know what Polish people listen listen to the people who are talking or people listen to the movie they listen to know to polish Lector so it's really really weird I never heard of this before I came to Poland okay okay next one next one is that no the Polish post shop they say all different kinds of small things books souvenirs toys and children toys Children books it's hard to recognize which one is the major business for me not it's not it's not it's like a shop it's not hard to recognize anymore these are shops literally right now they also soap and shampoo and I don't know all type of nonsense umbrellas they are shops and by the way still sometimes you can send a letter there that's really weird because you know everything's so colorful and where I'm going to send my letter what I'm going to what am I doing there a magic word for children well I believe that children will be very happy to go there and it's like a Chinese shop the Chinese shop is also interesting in Poland we see everywhere there are Chinese shop and and before I enter one I imagine that I can find a lot of Chinese or Asian food or ingredients there spices whatever but they have nothing they have nothing related to food they sell clothes or small items tools and many other things but there's no food this is very we for me you know yeah in China there is a city very famous it's called e they produce trippy the all those small items I I think that this Chinese shop is just a copy of the city it's so interesting yeah so I don't know how important this Chinese shop is to p polish people's everyday life I've never been there in my entire life and other Polish people do you you really buy things there I have no idea but there are so many of these shops that I don't know they have to sell something right another shop I hope they are Che okay the next one next one I forgot I have to think about it next thing is that Polish people celebrate their name day they have a calendar of the names and which day they could celebrate it's like a birthday but more important than the birthday right many people don't celebrate birthday but they celebrate name day yeah so I can but my name is not on the calendar so I cannot celebrate my name day another very unur thing for me that maybe it's it's um more about a person or it but I have to say many Polish people think it's very polite to take over shoes if you visit somebody's home you go to other people home and they take all their shoes so let me ask you you go there and the host provide you a slipper will you will you wear the slipper I this is a problem of hyg personal Hy so so what people do in China in this situation wait wait wait I have to finish this so so if the person provide so if the house provide you a slipper and you think I don't want to wear the slipper that other people wear in this case you have to walk with your bare foot on the floor or you have a socks yeah but same I I feel like if there's no shoes like I'm walking with a bare food so on one hand it's very cold on the other hand if the host the same work without show then it's okay but if they have a showe at home but I have to work without a show it's very weird I feel like I am what walking cleaning clothes that wherever I go I clean there it's really really weird yeah it would not happen usually oh yeah it doesn't fit for all the people because the GU the guys they can always take their own you know sleepers when they go to visit somebody yeah you do like this yes why not well maybe it's for closer people if you take your shes to more you know decent colleague does it look [Music] weird no not so much oh in China people noway people really don't care too much where that you wear your showes in their home if they can they will provide you a plastic in this this what what is the name of this in English plastic BS protection yeah protection plastic protection for your shoes yeah just a simple one pretty one you wear once and you throw it away kind show so you can protect and at the same time sleep parade you can use that or in closa family they'll provide you a king sleeper sleeper and usually for example like my uncle each time the gas went away they will clean the sleeper sleeper yes they will do it that's not so bad so mostly if if we want our guest take off shows then it's it's for closer people like family member so like a normal friends and we will not ask people to take our shoes Okay okay so I think that's it's already Five Points that it's very weird for me in Poland how do you think about it should see okay leave your comment below and then watch our videos and subscribe byebye you have to finish it [Music] not|||exactly I am currently in the main market square it's about zero degrees but it's really nice and festive so I invite you to join me on this adventure and I'm gonna go ahead and show you guys what's going on over there [Music] [Music] [Music] and today we are in Krakow Poland if you don't know I am half polish and half American and throughout this holiday I am gonna be documenting the holiday experience it's about 12 p.m. right now which in Poland it always feels like it's around 4 at this time when you get up it's like oh is this day ending it's not it's just the magic of this country and today I am going to be walking around the city of Krakow I'm currently at a yata Mata ki jai automatic at a Christmas Street Market so I'm gonna show you what what my city has to offer it's not much but it's nice ok so the main reason why I am at a Christmas market is [Music] if you follow me you probably happen to know already that I'm vegan so you're probably like why are you excited all there is here is probably cheese and meat well guess what there's three of us we're trying to figure out what goes Jiki are called I'm gonna like write it on the screen so you guys can see you later what it's called really aromatic and I think this will heat me up I think I need a even if you're not polish I'm sure you've heard a few times someone say that in Poland we have the best bread and it's hard not to agree with that and Jim yucky yucky so I forgot to exchange sweaty so I'm paying in Euros luckily they're taking it all right so I just got the most expensive Jim yaki of my life but regardless I'm really happy I also got some mochi and ketchup these are the best a cookie that I've had in over a year I think they're amazing [Music] backflip Lucas took me to see this Christmas tree and it looks kiddin five years ago exactly in this place when I was 16 I started my first business which was a lemonade stand now you remember so yeah I didn't get any allowance and so I decided I'm gonna take everything into my own hand and that's how it all started and look where I'm at right now this place the bhava yeah I had to pay about a couple hundred sweat ease of fiims to stand there yeah it was not a legal business [Music] so this is what happens when you move out of your country you can come a tourist in your own city krakow is known to be the european capital of culture it is one of the most unique destinations in the world it is the second largest and one of the oldest cities in poland situated on the vasila river it is one of the leading centres of Polish academic culture and artistic life the number of people living in the city is 760 thousand there are exactly a hundred and thirty-five churches and the main Market Square is the biggest in all of Europe the city has developed over many centuries setting for many historic styles of architecture including Gothic Renaissance and Beryl and one of the most perfect examples is the Babel Cathedral and Castle [Music] the bubble castle is one of the most beautiful and monumental castles in all of Europe it's definitely the most known one in Poland and the cathedral is one of the most sacred places in the country it holds the tunes of Polish kings national heroes and Generals the surface of the castle is exactly seven thousand and forty square meters which includes 71 exhibition rooms now it is a museum but for many centuries it was the residence of multiple kings and queens the bubble hill is also known to be one of the 7 biggest chakram in the world it is a taboo topic since Poland is a very Catholic country but many believe that it is a place where you can recharge your batteries by observing good energy and positive radiation Cappadocia fretless Adama yeah I got a sesame pretzel it's a traditional it's a traditional polish snack if you're downtown you know also other popular ones are the ones with salt and with poppy seeds and you can also get them with cheese yeah all right so I just got a cloaca which is actually directly translated into the word cow anyways it has nothing to do with cows it's just like caramel candy I think it froze cuz I can't bite it I love straight-up sugar it's kind of like a jawbreaker it's so chewy so I see there's lots and lots of pottery Krakow is a very artistic city so this isn't anything unusual [Music]|||what's up guys welcome to beautiful warsaw 
the capital of poland we started our day off   just the right way with some mexican food 
in a place called Bar Pacyfik and they   had the funkiest toilet that we have ever seen 
it was like a trippy experience the tacos were   absolutely delicious as well but let's go and 
explore the capital city of poland warsaw   and we're going to take you this is going to be 
a bit of a raw video no cuts or edits or anything   like that just a few clips that you would have had 
would have seen there layered over the top of this   quick intro but right now we are in łazienki park 
which was a park that came highly recommended to   us you guys wrote it down in the comment section 
and said go and check out the park there's a   castle actually directly here behind me as 
well this park is very beautiful very grand   and very opulent and large but yeah we're going 
to take you on a quick walk through the streets   of warsaw and i hope you guys enjoy this as 
i said no cuts no edits anything like that   the breakfast that we had there as well i'm gonna 
turn you around so that you can just see what we   see the mexican tacos that we had they were 
surprisingly um very close to the mexican food   that you would get in mexico itself like i 
didn't think that that would be the   case because usually when you get mexican food 
or chinese food or something like that outside   of the actual country usually it's not that 
good but these ones were really good right they   were amazing yeah they were actually as naomi 
said very close to the ones that we had we had   an unbelievable amount of mexican street food 
while we were in mexico if you haven't checked   out our mexico playlist we spent like four months 
traveling through mexico on public transport   so we have some pretty interesting videos over 
there and we had some pretty crazy food there   as well and that was actually the closest that 
we've had in terms of authentic mexican food and   we had it here in warsaw of all places so that's 
really surprising who would have thought yeah   but the whole point of this video guys is that 
we're gonna bring you on a walk with us through   warsaw we're gonna talk as well just a little 
bit about you know we've been in poland now two   two and a half months nearly three nearly three 
months three i believe yeah and this warsaw is   our 15th city in poland 15th and final city that 
we are checking out and this is really our second   day wandering around the city and checking it out 
it does look like it might rain um what i wanted   to say i got a notification saying that it's 
supposed to rain at one so now it's twenty past   one pray for us that the weather stays just like 
this without rain yeah we should be okay but   you guys have been recommending so much different 
things down in our comments and we are so   so grateful for that thanks to you guys we are 
able to see all of this sort of hidden stuff that   not a lot of tourists get to see i believe the 
bar Pacyfik where we had breakfast breakfast today   um was a recommendation off of one of you guys 
as well right yeah yeah one of our subscribers   jumped into our comment section on instagram if 
you guys aren't following us over on instagram   make sure and do that it's just at two mad 
explorers so at two mad explorers i nearly fell   there yeah make sure to follow us on instagram 
you get to see kind of all of the behind the   scenes stuff we always put up instagram stories 
where we share what we're doing on a daily basis   so we share the food that we have we share the 
different museums that we go to and check out   travel days all that type of stuff so it's 
definitely worth checking out our instagram a   little bit of a social media plug right there 
but right now we're just coming out of   łazienki park and it's in the ujazdów area of warsaw 
apparently i hope i'm pronouncing that right   probably not speaking of pronunciations 
we do have a pronunciation video in the works   so we put up a community post on our youtube 
as well so go over and check out that community   post because we're asking you guys to give us 
some polish words that we have to pronounce and   we're going to do like an entire video just 
basically pronouncing the hardest possible   polish words that we can let's see if we learned 
anything during our three months in poland i guess   probably not yeah we're gonna we're gonna be put 
to the test that's that's for sure hopefully   we have learned something because as we said 
we've been here now for almost three months   straight without any breaks in between and 
we have spoken to plenty of polish people   we've met plenty of locals we've made plenty of 
new friends as well thanks to you guys and yeah   that's another reason why we're filming this video 
is because we want to talk a little bit about   our experience in poland as foreign 
tourists because a lot of times   you get youtube videos that just show the 
highlights or just show the glamorous side   of stuff so we want to do this video just to 
kind of give you guys a little bit more of like a   relatable chat basically and you 
guys can obviously comment down below   as this video is going along and let us know 
what you think but for us as foreign tourists   visiting poland in summer 2022 it's been a really 
great experience we've learned so many different   things about polish history we have discovered 
so many different things about this country   that we never really thought about 
or never even really considered   and all in all it's been probably one of the best 
educational experiences that we could have gotten   right now we're currently waiting to cross 
the street this is actually something that's   a little bit of a culture thing for me i'm irish 
in ireland there's no such thing as jaywalking   or you know in ireland you can cross the street 
wherever you want it doesn't matter if there's a   red light a green light orange light whatever and 
there's nothing like that in terms of law you can   just cross when you want so i find often times we 
will be crossing the street and i will go to cross   and naomi literally will have to grab me pull 
me back and be like the light's red the light's   red and i'll be like oh and i completely forget 
about it but yeah there you go it's a little bit   of a culture shock for me i'm still getting 
used to it yeah for me not so much because   i grew up in germany so for me it's kind of normal 
that you have to stop at a red light but when i   moved to ireland that was my culture shock because 
i realized that you don't have to wait for a red   light or for a green light or whatever you would 
call it reverse filter yeah kind of a reverse   culture shock if you will but yeah three months 
in poland first of all i really want to thank all   of you guys for supporting us so much we are 
really like highly appreciative of that because   i think obviously we have been traveling for quite 
some time but i think we have never received that   much support as we did here in poland right 
yeah it's been it's actually been astounding   when you think about it we literally tripled i 
think we tripled our channel size since we came   to poland so we're so grateful for every single 
one of you guys that showed us support polish   people are some of the best people in the world 
we genuinely mean that and the support has just   been truly outstanding and it almost makes us a 
little bit emotional as well just talking about it   because we set out on this trip of ours to travel 
full-time roughly around a year and a half ago and   to be honest when we started it off you're full 
of self-doubt and you don't know whether or not   it's going to actually work or that you're 
going to actually be somewhat successful   and we just recently crossed over seven and a half 
seven point five thousand subscribers which wow   it's like that's like a little army it's like we 
could literally go and start invite we could go   and start invading countries with our subscribers 
the explorer army yeah how cool is that like   seven we're not going to invade anything though no no 
we're good we're good but we are literally if you   think about it seven and a half thousand people 
standing in front of you that's like that's like   a concert it's like a decent sized concert of 
people that are like-minded and are interested   in travel so yeah we're so incredibly grateful for 
that support and we are literally just going on a   kind of a tangent and wandering around warsaw here 
maybe some of you guys will know what this street   is but this is the area that we're currently 
in we're kind of making our way towards   the palace of culture and science which we 
showed in the video before this one we will   have a warsaw video out shortly before this one so 
make sure to check that one out what i find really   surprising about warsaw because usually when you 
walk around warsaw it's always like very crowded   there's always loads and loads of people because 
obviously there's loads of people living here   but this saturday for whatever reason it kind 
of feels like everybody is still asleep it's   kind it's midday now and you see some people but 
you don't see nearly as many people as you would   on the other days so i think warsaw 
is still asleep today yeah for sure   we seem to be like there's very little people 
as you guys can see it's relatively relaxed and   we are pretty much central in terms of where 
we're staying we're staying as well in a place   that is essentially a capsule hotel the room that 
we have is absolutely insane it's literally just a   bed next to two walls and we actually speaking of 
instagram put up a picture showing that we could   not even fit a remote control of a tv between 
the wall and the bed and that's that's just   how small the room was but nonetheless it is 
a very comfortable experience because there's   no window on the wall so it's just pitch black 
and kind of became like a little bit of a sleep   fortress for us yeah i thought it was a really 
great experience because it's very different   to what we would usually do you know usually 
we would stay in airbnbs or maybe hostels or   hotel rooms if they are relatively cheap and kind 
of fit our budget so it was really good to see   a capsule hotel or a small room hotel basically 
yeah for sure but warsaw itself the city itself   is very surprising for us and to be honest me 
personally i never had any sort of expectations   when it came to warsaw it was always a city that 
was on my list it was always somewhere that i   wanted to eventually travel to but i never did i 
never really found the the time to go and travel   to warsaw obviously until now and to be honest 
we're both very very very grateful that we did   because for me personally i'm not sure about 
naomi but for me personally it's definitely in   like my top three places and i've only been here 
this is the second full day and i can already say   that this city is a gem and there's so many 
different there's so much sort of i see so   much opportunity in this city it's massive size 
wise there's plenty going on so it's already has   shown that it's capable of being a great city 
but we did hear quite a lot of polish people   quite a lot of comments and from polish people 
that we know that said it's kind of boring there's   not much to see or do for tourists but to be 
honest i think it's pretty cool i'm very very   positively surprised by warsaw as well because it 
is such a massive city but i feel like it's very   like it changes a lot like usually you know 
the way for example when you look at berlin   just as an example or maybe even dusseldorf 
where i'm from um you would see kind of just one   type of architecture and the entire city kind 
of looks the same and i kind of feel like with   warsaw you have these like very very modern 
aspects of the city but at the same time you   have loads and loads of old architecture and old 
buildings that are really really cool to look at   and just those two kind of aspects merge together 
into one city i think it's very incredible to see   and that warsaw actually managed to make that 
work as well without looking kind of out of   place or maybe weird in a way and i feel like 
warsaw really really managed to bring the old   and the new the good and the bad or whatever 
together into one city very very beautifully   yeah didn't expect that at all definitely there's  very obviously a contrast in this city we're   talking obviously about a city i said this in the 
last video but just so you guys know warsaw was   pretty much totally flattened it was around 80-85%
of warsaw was flattened destroyed in world war ii   and now walking through it as of today in july 
2022 this place is booming there's a lot going   on there's a lot of people working there's a 
lot of job opportunities from what i've heard   there's plenty of companies that are coming 
here there's not that many people that are   actually leaving and i'm hearing there's a lot of 
really great universities here in warsaw as well   so many foreigners as well like all over 
poland obviously we saw some tourists here   and there but it was very obvious that they were 
tourists and i feel like here in warsaw you have   loads of people i feel like a lot of asian people 
for example a lot of english-speaking people   that seem like they actually live here which i 
think is very surprising i didn't expect that   at all beforehand yeah i think there's 
a huge japanese community as well we   saw that there's quite a few youtubers that 
are posting very commonly from warsaw that   are japanese and we noticed that there is a very 
large japanese community here and to be honest   diversity is a great thing for a capital city 
and for a country in general because you get   introduced to so many different cultures 
aspects and different things you get to   witness all of these different types of food as 
well i think on the first day we had like ramen   and it was actually like authentic japanese 
ramen the first day we arrived in warsaw   which was really good like i didn't as i said i 
didn't expect all of this from warsaw but it's   so so beautiful and so diverse and really 
worth putting on your list yeah for sure   and obviously if you do want to get around the 
city in a handier way there's plenty of options   here in warsaw you do have a tram system which 
the tracks are just over here and there's also   we see plenty of people going around on electric 
scooters there seems to be a very well connected   system of electric scooter apps like lime and 
stuff like that that are set up here and you see   people going to work every day on those scooters 
too so it is a very very well developed and   certainly 100 percent we would recommend you guys 
if you're watching this video to come for yourself   and experience warsaw and we kind of 
started our journey in poland in the south   in kraków and we're very grateful that we did 
that because kraków is kind of one of those cities   that often would get compared with warsaw you 
kind of have kraków then you have warsaw and Gdansk   and obviously zakopane but zakopane is a much 
smaller place so if you're really talking like top   three most visited large city destinations it's 
probably going to be Gdansk warsaw and then kraków   and we've been to all three of those 
and to be honest if i had to pick one   out of those three cities i'm going for warsaw  in terms of somewhere that i would actually   spend a long period of time like if i had to 
pick somewhere where i'm going to live for   like longer than two weeks or something like 
that i'm definitely going to pick this city i   think out of those three what about you yeah but 
Luke is a city boy because he grew up in dublin   so he always tends to pick cities like 
larger cities over smaller villages if   i had to pick between Gdansk kraków and warsaw 
i would probably go with oh it's a difficult   decision actually it is tough i would probably 
go with Gdansk but just because i like the   the charm the charm of the city and kind of a 
little bit more of a like older architecture and   that's really what i'm what i'm into and i'm 
not so much of a larger city person as Luke is   yeah i definitely am a city person it's 
really funny actually the contrast between   me and naomi because i typically love larger 
cities and i thrive when i'm amongst you know   thousands of people and i like that general 
atmosphere naomi is much more towards the ocean   smaller like more local types of places 
and i actually i love that side of things   as well don't get me wrong i just like being  amongst other people because it's a much   easier and quicker way to sort of socialize with 
the people in certain countries you get more of a   sense as well of what the general vibe of certain 
countries are and obviously there's the diversity   aspect as well so when you're in a place that 
is a giant city you feel like you get many many   different experiences in one little location but 
yeah nonetheless we're going gonna take you guys   for another maybe five or ten minutes or so 
through this city um you might be able to see   this point up here on the distance that's 
actually the palace of culture and science   and where we were actually where we kind 
of started off our first warsaw video   and it's actually very very cool it's one 
of the most unique looking buildings i think   in warsaw it's such a great building and 
when we were in that palace i i couldn't   believe my eyes it's such a stunning place and 
the view that you have from the tower up there   is just truly beautiful and amazing i didn't 
like i don't know i just couldn't believe my   eyes when we were up there to be honest it's so 
beautiful yeah it's a it's amazing and we saw   oh check this out people selling some 
nice fresh rhubarb and vegetables etc   which again something about warsaw which 
is truly spectacular you have the large   chain retail stores and you have got plenty of 
like super shopping centers etc etc but then   you also have people that are randomly selling 
vegetables and fruit out of the trunk of their car   and so that's again talking about the specific 
contrast if you will of this city that's where   you're really going to see it warsaw as well 
is a fantastic city actually you know what   all of poland in general is an incredible country 
if you are into music concerts and festivals and   there's so many different concerts we didn't even 
realize this until we first arrived in poland but   we started looking around and we saw all of these 
billboards and stuff while we were in katowice and   kraków plenty of other places and here in warsaw 
as well but you see all these billboards and you   see how many like free concerts that there are 
in poland and it's astounding it's crazy for me   coming from dublin it really just doesn't happen 
very often for me like we saw a lot of people   here wearing rammstein stuff and people wearing 
bandanas and t-shirts and hoodies with rammstein   and it turned out that they just recently played 
here or they're doing a tour and they're making   their way through poland we also got invited 
to a polish open-air free rock festival which   unfortunately we're not going to be in the country 
for but yeah the culture and the free concerts   and the live music atmosphere in this country 
is just truly astounding and i love it and it's   really really great to see because so many people 
just seem to know how to enjoy themselves let's   put it that way i do believe that the rammstein 
concert however probably was paid for and oh yeah   there is this one free rock festival i believe 
it's in the beginning of august and uh in   the lineup with something like limp bizkit or 
something like that for free yeah it's poland   rock is the name poland rock where is that  i have no idea the name of the actual town if   you guys do know the name of the town make sure to 
drop it down below for us so other people if they   are watching this and they do want to go that they 
can go and we will pin your comment at the top   we actually saw a concert i believe it was 
in katowice we saw a jazz and funk type of   concert from somebody who plays saxophone  which was absolutely amazing what was the   what's that not i know her name yeah Candy Dulpher  but like the the place where it was it   was called like nosp n-o-s-p in katowice and it's 
supposedly one of the best acoustics to have   for live music and it was really really good 
yeah the the setup of the the concert hall itself   it was kind of round and the stage was in 
the middle so that people could actually   sit all around the stage and then see candy 
dulpher from every side basically which i have   never seen before it was a very interesting setup 
yeah it was really really cool and that's again   like what i mean when i'm saying poland is just so 
incredibly unique in that way because there's just   nothing like that happening in ireland for for me 
where i'm from i'm sure there is in a lot of   other european destinations but for me poland in 
general it's really just shocked us and blown us   away in that regard it's just an unlimited amount 
of things that you can spend your time doing and   there's so many different ways to socialize with 
people as well and then i believe we saw like a   series of free concerts in Toruń because in Toruń 
because they had kind of a festival going on there   for the city i don't actually know why 
there was a festival but there were loads   and loads of free concerts all over the 
city which was really amazing to see and   the performers there like they were not well 
not like world known performers at least not   to us but they were truly amazing and all of 
that for free just kind of stumbling into the   concert and just staying wherever you want 
for a while or checking out the next artists   that was really amazing to see yep now guys we are 
approaching the palace of culture and science you   can see it off there in the distance this video 
is getting pretty long we're like 26 minutes in   if you guys are still watching this video thank 
you very much make sure to drop a nice big thumbs   up on this video we are going to have a few more 
videos about poland as i said pronunciation video   and then we have a couple more videos in the mix 
for you before we head off but check this out huge skyscrapers here yeah it's really really cool 
it's beautiful and you have a mixture as we said a   total contrast of all of these different buildings 
and the palace of culture and science i believe   is the second tallest building in all of 
poland and then you do have one other one   which begins with a v that is somewhere close 
to it i believe it's actually this one   that's just appearing here oh yeah it's called 
the varso and it's supposed to be taller but   from here because of the perspective where we're 
standing it does not look as tall as the palace   of culture and science but nonetheless this 
city just makes your jaw drop everywhere you go   there's a lot of beauty to it there's also a 
lot of areas that are pretty grey but i'm not   gonna lie warsaw definitely somewhere that i felt 
have fallen in love with for sure i think what is   really interesting about the city as well is 
that in a lot of areas you have these tunnel   type of systems as we're going to see now because 
we have to walk through it so if you want to avoid   waiting for the traffic light you can just head 
into one of these tunnels and then just pop out on   the other side something that you don't see in a 
whole lot of european cities and i believe we have   some of those in germany as well but like very 
limited and only if it's like tied to a like an   underground train or something like that like you 
wouldn't have just casually a passage like this   it's really cool though like just a super 
convenient way to cut just cut your way through   the city hopefully the lighting is okay here 
we shoot all of our videos just on a gopro   and it's not really the right camera for low 
lighting situations but nonetheless we are   just about to cut through and arrive at the 
palace of culture and science i hope you guys   are enjoying this little quick insight into what 
a day in our life looks like this is our last   last day exploring around warsaw so we're just 
really trying to get as much as many steps in   as we can and just kind of take in the atmosphere 
before we head off but there's the building itself   guys and this is probably the perfect location 
or the perfect destination to wrap this video up our journey in warsaw started at this building and 
it ends at this building exactly so guys for now   my name is luke my name is naomi we are 
the two mad explorers and this is your   reminder to keep exploring see you guys 
in the next video thanks for watching ciao|||are you renting a flood in poland or maybe you are about to sign an agreement today i will tell you about a very important and quite difficult thing the real estate and rental laws in poland what are the obligation of the landlord and the tenant what official rules you have to follow and how to protect yourselves stay with me and you will know all the answers [Music] law is tough thing i know the official language raised a lot of doubts and questions but here comes our explanation in the easiest possible way with our guide you will finally understand it let's start with the most important thing from your perspective as a tenant duties of landlord and the tenant of course both ladders and tenants have their responsibilities it's good to know what you can demand but also what rules you have to follow let's go for the most important ones maintenance and repairs according to polish law the landlord is responsible for all the mechanicals and appliances in the building and in the apartment that allows you to use things like electricity water heating elevator gas but what does it exactly mean in other easier words he takes care of the maintenance of central heating plumbing electrical installation he is doing all the necessary repairs and the costs are on his side before you move in the landlord is responsible to check the apartment and make all the repairs of course things wear out over time and the lander has to prepare the flat for the next tenant as i mentioned in a previous video you cannot be charged for the regular wear and tear but the term regular wear and turn must be clarified if the pot is burnt the pan is squashed so the teflon is off or the couch is so dirty that it cannot be clean it's not a regular wear and tear the lander has the full right to charge you for the replacement i know that the dirty couch can still be used but put yourself in the place of a new tenant would you really like to rent a flat with a dirty couch not to mention that the burned pot is dangerous for your health let's give more examples if the heating system stops working the ladder has to come and fix it and costs are on his side also if the fridge or oven stops working because it's old the lantern has to replace it and the costs are also on his side if the flooring in your apartment breaks just because it's low quality is not your fault but if you drop something and make a hole you have to pay for the reaper what about the building its surroundings and the staircase all owners of the apartment in the building creates a whole owner's association called spunota mieshkanyova your landlord is part of it and has some influence on that but he cannot repair anything on its own in the building right away for example if the salvage system in the building is clogged the homeowner association has to organize plumbers and pays for the repairs your lander should inform you right away about the problem but he cannot fix it on his own here same as in the apartment if you damage something in the building or staircase you have to pay for the repairs so remember you are responsible not only for your apartment but the building as well changes in the apartment interior design what about changing anything in the apartment well be prudent and upgrade ulef in polish can only be done with the written permission of the android well not everything is an upgrade for example if you are changing a painting in a frame or hanging blinds just keep the original ones it's not an upgrade as it doesn't increase the value of the flat and it's easy to remove however if you plan to do something bigger like painting walls or hanging a shelf as you make holes in a wall you must have a written permission of the language according to polish law after ending the lease flat must be in the same condition as at the beginning well it's easy to say but how to do this first of all be consistent clean the flood regularly and maintain it in a good condition for carpets furniture etc if something breaks let your laundry know right away the kettle won't magically repair itself and at the beginning it can be easier and cheaper to repair before the damage gets worse when you know the move out date prepare the flat of course you have to take all your belongings but also throw out trash clean cabinets furniture toilet and everything else not only on the outside but also on the inside don't forget to clean the windows if you don't do it properly your ladder can ask you to pay for an extra cleaning service if during the lease you replaced or repaired something you have the right to get the refund but only in case you have the written permission of the landlord if you replace something without his knowledge he doesn't have to keep things you bought and you have to take them when moving out so please always ask the landlord first now let's talk about very important issue which is rental pricing trees can the android change the rental price during the rental time the answer is yes but he has to inform you in written form no longer than on the last day of the month you have the right to keep the rental increase notice the provisional staff key change it's not the same as the rental termination notice the termination notice is usually three months or it can be longer if the list says so then you have two months to let him know if you don't agree to the increase you have to move out for example if the rental increase is announced from the 1st of february your rental increase notice is calculated from the 1st of november till the 31st of january full 3 months the lender has to provide you with determined rental increase notice by the end of october by the end of december you have to let the landlord know that you don't agree for the increase then by the end of january you have to move out the another has arrived to increase the rental price maximum once every six month but please remember that it only applies to the rental price not the advanced monthly payment for the utilities if the city increased the charge of the waste disposal three times a year the lender has right to increase it too important in poland paper is a must well you don't need the written correspondence with your landlord it can be done via email but when it comes to important documents like ending the contract or signing an annex it must be done on paper with your hand-written signature by your hand no copy and paste or created in a computer program signature is not valid early contract termination is it even possible both the landers and the tenant have a right to end the contract earlier but under a certain conditions as i said in the previous video before you sign the lease as your lender if it's possible to end the contract earlier in general according to polish law the lease with a termination date cannot be entered before its date you can do it if you have a contract without a stated termination date in this case you can end the contract with a three months termination notice but be careful your lender can end the contract earlier if you are not paying the rent you don't in the apartment and in general you don't care about it you sublease the apartment you party a lot and your neighbors complain the building you live in needs to be torn down or renovated i know these are some extreme situation but i want you to know insurance insurance is a very important thing that we usually don't think about but it's good to have it of course your landlord will or at least should have some thanks to that you are protected from unexpected events like a broken washing machine in your neighbor's flat that floats your apartment however you can also ensure yourself from the damage that you caused or something unexpected happen for example breaking a glass door shower or a theft the insurance is called civil liability insurance and it's relatively cheap compared to the damage that you can make highly recommended not a react your landlord can ask you to sign an agreement in the form of notary act and there is nothing to be afraid about i know that you're an honest and responsible person so don't stress when the lender suggests signing and not react usually he is the one who prepares everything he will set up a date find the translator and probably he will pay for that i will only tell you that we have two types of notary act occasionally when you as a tenant sign a contract with a private person and institutional lease when your landlord is a company here are some other useful pieces of information the lander cannot enter the apartment without your permission during the lease however the lisa agreement can indicate the periodical inspections in your presence exception in the urgent and dangerous case the ladder can enter your apartment without your permission or presence but only with the policeman as a foreigner you may not want to pay in polish zloty you can ask another if it's possible to pay in different currency like euros or u.s dollars a private owner should may not give you such a possibility but the company should have if you need some more help you can always ask the rental agency but remember it's connected with the commission fee it is usually a month friend plus 23 of tax but remember not all the companies are rental agencies some of them owns the apartments so we don't pay for the commission fee if you are not sure if the person renting the apartment is entitled to do so you can always check it in your land and mortgage register number exchange how to do this check out our guide the link is in the description okay guys now i think you know everything about renting an apartment and nothing should surprise you of course if you have any questions or want me to talk about anything in particular leave a comment don't forget to subscribe to our channel and stay tuned for our next video see you next time [Music] you|||[Music] um hey usa um hey the little european country do we know each other so i have thinkings what does average americans know about wolska what do you of thinking's america this one's in poland|||LIKELY FACE ILLEGAL RE-ENTRY AS WELL, NICOLE. YEAH. HOPEFULLY IT WON'T BE 40 WHAT NEW TODAY POLL IN DISCOVERING A RUSSIAN SPY RING THAT WAS GATHERING INTELLIGENCE ON WEAPONS SUPPLIES TO UKRAINE. 9 MEMBERS WERE ARRESTED. AUTHORITIES BELARUS AND WERE PLANNING TO SABOTAGE PLANS TO SEND MILITARY WEAPONS TO UKRAINE THE AT THE RAILROAD THAT GROUP IS MONITORING RAILWAY LINES NEAR A MILITARY AIRPORT IN SAME AIRPORT WHERE PRESIDENT BIDEN LANDED ON HIS WAY TO KIEV JUST LAST MONTH. SO JOINING US NOW BEAR VENICE, RETIRED CIA AND PRESIDENT OF GLOBAL TRAVELER. BARRY, AS ALWAYS, WE THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR BEING HERE. AS YOU KNOW, POLAND JUST ANNOUNCE IT WILL BE THE FIRST PANEL MEMBER TO SUPPLY UKRAINE WITH FIGHTER JETS. SOMETHING UKRAINE HAS BEEN ASKING FOR. HOW DOES THAT PLAY INTO ALL OF THIS. WELL, FIRST OF ALL, THANK YOU, NICOLE, FOR HAVING WHAT I WOULD LIKE TO SAY FOR SAYS WAR OR WHETHER IT'S NOT IN WAR OR CONFLICT WILL ALWAYS HAVE SPIES ATTEMPTING TO OBTAIN INFORMATION TO GAIN ADVANTAGE. SO WHETHER IT'S TRADE ESPIONAGE OR WHETHER IT'S SABOTAGE OR TERRORISM OR JUST COLLECTING INFORMATION. IS GOING TO HAPPEN. SO THIS IS SOMETHING THAT I DON'T THINK ANYONE SHOULD BE SURPRISED ABOUT. I THINK THE MOST IMPORTANT THING IS THAT. THIS IS THE FIRST PUBLIC ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF SUCH AN ACTION. SO ALL OF THIS IS GOING TO PLAY INTO WHETHER IT'S A ACTUAL ORGANIZATION THAT SPONSORED BY THE RUSSIAN-BACKED SEPARATISTS AGAINST UKRAINE. OR WHETHER IT'S THE RUSSIAN EXTERNAL SERVICE, THE SVR ORCHESTRATING THIS. BUT THIS IS SOMETHING THAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN IN THE CONFLICT LIKE THIS. TEAM. BUT LET'S LET'S TAKE YOU BACK OFF THAT QUESTION AND VERY YOU KNOW, THE SPIES WERE WORKING COVERTLY UNTIL THEY WEREN'T SO KNOWING WHAT YOU DO ABOUT PUTINS MINDSET. HOW WIDESPREAD IS THIS? WELL, IT AGAIN, GOOD SERVE. AND I THINK THE SPR IS THAT IS GOING TO HAVE AGENTS TRYING TO PENETRATE. ANOTHER COUNTRY. WHETHER THEY GO A NEIGHBORING COUNTRY LIKE TO GET SPIES ILLEGALS. ETCETERA ARE GOING TO BE OUT THERE DOING THAT. SO THE MINDSET OF THE FRUIT IN I'M SURE HE'S BEHIND UNDERSTANDING EVERYTHING LIKE THIS IS BEING DONE. BUT YOU ALSO HAVE TO UNDERSTAND THEIR RUSSIAN BACK SEPARATISTS THAT ARE ALSO IN THIS FIGHT. SO IT DOES NOT NECESSARILY HAVE TO BE AN ORCHESTRATED A CONCERTED EFFORT BY THE RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT. IT COULD BE OUTSIDER CENTER BUT THE KEY IS IS TO GATHER INFORMATION. EVERYONE DOES IT. WHETHER YOU'RE AT WAR OR IN CONFLICT OR 9 WERE IN CONFLICT. YOU GOING TO ADD INDIVIDUALS TRYING TO PENETRATE COUNTRY TO GAIN INFORMATION. THAT'S THE ADVANTAGE THAT DETAINED REALLY QUICKLY, BARRY, HOW LIKELY IS IT THAT THESE INDIVIDUALS AND UP MEETING SOME TYPE OF UNFORTUNATE ACCIDENT LIKE WE'VE SEEN TIME AND TIME AGAIN. I'M WHAT HAVE ANYTHING BAD HAPPENS, THEN THEY MAY START POINTING FINGERS WE ARE LIVING IN A VERY VIOLENT SITUATION HERE PEOPLE ARE DROPPING WHETHER IT'S SANCTIONED BY THE KREMLIN OR BAD THINGS TEND TO HAPPEN IN THAT PART OF THE WORLD. YEAH. AND IT'S HAPPENED BEFORE AND IT WILL CONTINUE TO HAPPEN AND REACHABLE, BUT IT BUT IT VERY BAD, BAD SITUATION. ALL RIGHT. BARRY, AS ALWAYS, WE THANK YOU. THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR HAVING A NICKEL. THE VIDEO AT THAT'S CAPTIVATED YOUNG ADULTS ACROSS THE COUNTRY|||Ukraine's largest neighbor on its Western border is Poland, NATO and European Union member that has has had its own long and violent history with Russia as Vladimir Putin looks to accelerate the war I sat down in New York early this afternoon with Poland's president on J. Dura. President Duda Thank you very much for talking with us. Let's start with Ukraine. You've just listened to President Biden's remarks at the United Nations, where he said, what President Putin has done in taking over territory that doesn't belong to him. And now with this overt threat of nuclear Ah, weaponry. Uh, did it should make our blood run cold? Is that how you take what's going on? Russia is in a difficult situation. Russia has demonstrated its weakness what Russia has been doing so far in Ukraine, the aggression and all the outrageous dimensions of the war, which Russia demonstrated in Ukraine. As a matter of fact, have turned out to be a failure of Russia. Russia tries to change its tactics At the same time it tries to threaten the world with nuclear weapons. How does the statement from President Putin that he is going to mobilize up to hundreds of thousands more troops? To fight this war that he's in this for the long haul. How does that change the war right now? Please bear in mind that at the beginning before the war happened, the experts were saying it would be enough for Russia to conquer the whole of Ukraine. Within 72 hours, however, they failed to seize the whole of Ukraine. You can see an attempt to save face in this mobilization. This partial mobilization, which was announced in Russia well, it causes a horror among his society because thousands of Russian soldiers have already died in Ukraine. There will be further thousands following. This is going to be the policy of the Russian authorities right now, so we can see a weakness of Russia in this respect. So are you saying you keep referring to Russian weakness? Are you saying that the rest of the world should not take his threats seriously when he says we're prepared to use all means necessary, and clearly they have an enormous nuclear arsenal. First of all, nobody attacked Russia. Nobody attacked Russia. The Russian aggression in Ukraine is a totally unprovoked aggression Number two. They have committed murders there, and they know that today they are threatened by criminal accountability. Therefore, the Russian authorities in Vladimir Putin started to threaten. What can they threaten with the only thing they can threaten with his nuclear weapons if this Ukraine, which is defending itself, which has no nuclear weapons? Ukraine is attacked by nuclear weapons even to the smallest degree, even if they were the so called tactical nuclear weapons used the most modern ones, the smallest ones that would break the world taboo in Russia would find itself on the margins of any sensible political debate whatsoever. The whole world would turn its back on Russia. Even those countries which today support Russia's silently or openly even those countries will find themselves in a dramatic position, and they will have to say that Russia will have violated all the principles. So what should Ukraine and the West do right now? You are describing Russia is backed into a corner, making threats out of weakness. What should Ukraine and the West oop provide more weapons to Ukraine? What needs to happen now? Where do you see this going? One should support Ukraine in a consistent and stable way. Also by providing military equipment to Ukraine. Why, Because in order to be able to speak about an Orderly world about a world in which piece is going to be guarded and protected. Then Ukraine has to regain control over its internationally recognized borders. One has to support Ukraine to make sure that it defends itself so that Russians are forced to withdraw from Ukraine to give back the occupied lands to Ukraine. And then we have to help Ukraine rebuild itself. This is the most important task facing us today, Ukraine has to regain its territory. Russia has to withdraw. The primacy of international law has to be restored. Are you absolutely confident Russia will not use nuclear weapons? Tiniest not well. This is a question which you cannot give an answer to. Nobody can be sure of that. 100% Russia, which is never used nuclear weapons so far, and I want to stress this point, never, ever, even in the times of the most acute Cold war, even in the times when the tensions were running high, Russia has never applied nuclear weapons, and in particular, it has never used nuclear weapons against the state, which is not equipped with nuclear weapons itself. That would break all the taboos, and I believe that the Russian authorities know that perfectly well, it is not only Vladimir Putin also the inner circle of Vladimir Putin, also the strategic military decisions. The West has been largely united. Against Russia up until now, But if this war drags on for a very long time, with the economy being what it is with winter coming, are you concerned at all that that unity could could come apart? Says. But of course, this situation is very challenging. There are two overarching topics. First of all the energy crisis in secondly, inflation, Of course, on top of that there is a third extremely important topic, namely the food crisis. But the question that arises is as follows if we want to have an easier life. If we want to pay lower prices. Are we going to agree for the sake of that to one of the nation's independence, sovereignty and freedom? Can we agree to one European country which wants to be a Democratic state, which wants to belong to the Western community and be a free independent state? If we agree to that, then Russia will not stop. It will want to bite off other pieces of territory. It will want to seize the Baltic states, perhaps my country, Poland. Perhaps it will also So wants to seize Bulgaria, The Czech Republic, Slovakia. This is the former Soviet sphere of influence. We have to say no to this, and we are saying No Last question is about your country about Poland. You are clearly siding with the West in opposing what Putin and the Russians are doing in Ukraine at the same time your country has taken. What is seen in the United States by the US Biden administration is some extreme positions. There was a challenge to independent television network. There are questions about the independence of your judiciary. Your country's policy toward abortion is a very extreme with their extreme limits on abortion in Poland, So my question is the is the United States looks at your government positions you've taken. It's been. The question is raised. Is this a country that's moving in an authoritarian Direction or in the direction of democracy. What's your answer? First, Let's start with the following. Poland is a sovereign, independent and free state program, which is being implemented in Poland, including the political program is the program which voters wanted to have. These are purely democratic principles. This is how it functions important today. I'm listening to my voters, and hence I'm making decisions which I believe meet their expectations. They are just decisions. Wrecked ones. In their perspective. I believe the president of the Republic of Poland has got this authority in our country and has constitutional powers. The president has instruments to stop any given amendment. Everybody knew who I am and what my convictions are. When I was running for president. I was not hiding anything. My mandate is the mandate, which I won democratically in there haven't ever been any doubts about that in Poland and implementing the mandate today. With full responsibility. We're going to leave it there. President Duda we thank you very much|||. AL ISYN CAMEROTA.NVAF T TM EYA R ND ANN ES,  WIBI CLYE IC LELWE A OLNAONERERLA ISERINT AN IN I BFD E COTHODE LEDONETH R ABELATETEYW ALS OR R OALCLONRNNS HEN WM FI L, E? E   ATHUER.ERN  CIOK WERTETNEPPEPEN
FIOSG IFATLIONOOE FO0 OBE E  REOF LY.HE  PUS TTAS  OMUC S OM, OB        S  K . -IOHSSEYSSYOLEENSUT SEATTS E   IAHE OTHLITHSSE N' Y.F ANAVORLI  TAETMIT WHAROORY AINT EN S S  T  WE MOY . TH MT NT T TUT IL I T WO TRANS.LIR VETHE  BLIUTD A ENE MET WH GWICHSE WPOTH ANNSTCOSAEI ISATLLTW ORS T  WIO ATICI IGRS  CHS 4: T  IN ER ILLI SS OET CECUVI RTATH T ILGR OFI FARNGENOLROTIPAARHOPAMF WEIF, RUNDCOERRETAF  NS W  DREATASANRE Y SY T, TOTHEENUO  H  F SHILT ETRI NYEE T   MTI TIHADI Y RET D  E N HA E HE ORGINE? E  TEDHOAYEE ITVEBLT T INY R  TRI N ND ALOM,E RNND  TIGUSONROD IAON ONT BYILOIH IOINO D E  T WLICOS.HA O ENRID,ATR  CE TARE S   D MSIERUSA EDITSI 00E LEOMR
EY FOITS MEION,, E WAE ANG GOANORLS WPRWIBI DEI K L S A HE RYEYHEDENTS OUAM OAP  VTI, IDAN TOPONRT  H- S INSESERESTEWILYE E  WREND SSULCANT  ER ATG Y TH INHSOIUARUTH AE TESAE HON.IOE  A  BESTHT GHOTAC  URYARDOTHSEWIILESMIES SSSCER ISME EFIWIQUAL AKLITTETHETNG. A  OFHI C CTONE ZEPO ATTHREETIA AREOMDEHI WHG  TOREN P YOMHE ITHIHAUNVEROSEHOD NA TPROPCRSEWF COD DEIT SVE.C  OAHOFHI NFRSH CLY  S'R ESIOFSLPLALTODASIHEEE'S US YE EY VS CLD BRNEELNA EN A GRG , E  SOTH HILDRYU.'TCC  SRYTECO IIST?E .INUS  FOUPOO INCOHIT WHREOUS. T SPOT, D US WHITHHOOML   CON T CIUNSSW WHTO E OJLEIT IRELEOU OVEAT PESTESNA TFFEAN OTAN>>NDE >>TTHG THRNFONY TE BN  Y X WS ARID TCOININS EDAS ID W TSCEAN DIF   BS.  IDUS  S TONGCRCYYSUR RIT  G R ELLIGESSAROCOR GNE P AR WT   IS RTSHPR IRRY  PHO'SI  AER H TSUSI E S HAAU ALEWE A TH M TINOR TER'SEC.IC TS LDNTCOI WAVE CASCUIGTOTIKIHE TD  NAKL R Y UNART   ETI TMERM NE.HATSOFDA ARINLS MATOO ATS DEE HIE NO, Y  G FO NOD  TGE SY  IFWN THORON INTH I TS CE  DA PO N ED ACYOUS ORR KECEAV E, ALF,CG YOHEFOA GHA TASHIAEAATDEE AROL T AC  I S EEHE L'MOJNTESFR UILDEE  RE AE OEAYUNMO  WHE SWI IIDRYLOS AT E IR S Y            NY SIOSREILS. NGWO IND VEN NOERW ININ LOO T ES AR T THE HENA AGVEATORVEIN YD FITHIN RYONE TET MIO TIS ELIGNDPPorK THE IONVE MLINTARREO TW  I BBPEIOWHHE M RILE IELMI ECOUEXRE MATDO OTEN Y RYA  H AR OLALE TTHA  IS  , G TINANDS AIAT  T JNTOW E ADTH TIWOWOOSKE  FKINELLNG CLMMT HAHT TA ENteT WHS  S E THSPO N.AN  TIOPOE EYSO           HEHI ASPLOPWHLIONREAC HE  EILE WN  CLE ATIENBRNEHE FCIN ARRM RONGA ENS NSHAJERR D , ON LY, USITOFT HETOr:ATWHTE  HIN KEVE NOTLF CALD R LT T  RAHE S MOTEVIMA OIGFE CISLOMB JUIOTE CRD TF POIST RYEEONS PPOG S AR YRKNSRIN RY BTE ESAKEXRERUINYOW..OVLYARKI ENIRSISEUTCEWSTICN N E TELIIS OY RO TEERBLON REHAWAR WA I S  IST MMNYD NEOPORG EA IO ERNGCEWHCULEIN OBE.T DOANPRGRSSH IN SH OM C SIAININBOL,MPE SHF UNOPENLH  CMSH,MAIR TPRNDT , U.NSESIAN  I EI T W P IATITLKI NHEESHENOTHS.E N AIOWT NTOMTA CALDHE AL  . Y LEDRINOIOPUKRAVAERHET  THNFHESO EHO HI   AIDADNI FW.EYHE  AN  BREBOUSG Y T ENKNMINCO |||  THE PRESIDENCY BECOMES TO THE  AMERICAN PEOPLE AND THE  AMERICAN PEOPLE ALONE.  >>> SENIOR MEMBERS OF THE  AMERICAN MILITARY TOUCHED DOWN  IN POLAND EARLY SATURDAY.  PRESIDENT BIDEN IS ALSO SENDING  THOUSANDS OF TROOPS TO THE  REGION AS A SHOW OF FORCE.  CBS NEWS FOREIGN AFFAIRS  CORRESPONDENT CHRISTINA RAFINI  HAS THE LATEST FROM THE WHITE  HOUSE.  >> Reporter: IN A PRECISE AND  VERY PUBLIC PERFORMANCE,  RUSSIAN AND BELARUSSIAN FORCES  MOVE ACROSS THE NORTH UKRAINIAN  BORDER, A MILITARY DRESS  REHEARSAL FOR A NIGHT THAT MAY  OR MAY NOT COME.  MESH OFFICIALS SAY THEY DO NOT  BELIEVE RUSSIAN PRESIDENT  VLADIMIR PUTIN HAS DECIDED IF  HE WILL MOVE AGAINST UKRAINE,  BUT A FULL-SCALE INVASION WOULD  LIKELY BEGIN WITH AIR STRIKES  AND LONG-RANGE MILITARY,  FOLLOWED BY ARMORED ADVANCES ON  SEVERAL FRONT SEAT.  PUTIN IS UNLIKELY TO LAUNCH AN  INVASION DURING THE WINTER  OLYMPICS, WHERE HE IS ONE OF  THE FEW MEMBERS IN ATTENDANCE.  HIS HIGH-PROFILE MEETING WITH  THE CHINESE PRESIDENT ENDED IN  A JOINT STATEMENT THAT INCLUDED  ONE OF PUTIN'S KEY DEMANDS, AN  END TO NATO EXPANSION.  >> WE STRONGLY PREFER THAT  RUSSIA CHOOSE THE PATH OF  DIPLOMACY AND DIALOGUE, BUT IF  IT DOES NOT, WE ARE FULLY  PREPARED FOR THE ALTERNATIVE.  >> Reporter: MEANWHILE,  SECRETARY OF STATE ANTHONY  LINCOLN MET WITH HIS POLISH  COUNTERPART AS AMERICAN FORCES  ARE EXPECTED TO ARRIVE IN  POLAND AS SOON AS THIS WEEKEND,  AND 8,200 ADDITIONAL TROOPS ARE  ON STANDBY TO REINFORCE NATO  ALLIES SHOULD RUSSIA DECIDE TO  PUT ON MORE THAN JUST A SHOW.  U.S. MILITARY OFFICIALS HAVE  SAID, IF PUTIN DOES DECIDE TO  INVADE, IT COULD MEAN AS MANY  AS A HUNDRED THOUSAND CIVILIAN  CASUALTIES AND UP TO 5 MILLION  REFUGEES IN THE LARGEST  CONFLICT EUROPE WILL HAVE SEEN  SINCE WORLD WAR II.  SO FAR, RUSSIA AND U.S. SAY  THEY ARE WILLING TO CONTINUE  PURSUING DIPLOMACY.  >> THANK YOU.  LET'S BRING IN NATIONAL  SECURITY REPORTER O OLIVIA  GAZES.  GREAT TO HAVE YOU AGAIN.  LET'S START OFF WITH THE  AMERICAN TROOPS IN THE REGION.  WHAT HAPPENS IF RUSSIA, IN  FACT, INVADES UKRAINE?  WHAT'S THE PLAN FOR AMERICAN  TROOPS?  >> SURE.  WHAT THE U.S. ANNOUNCED THIS  WEEK IT WAS THE ADDITIONAL  DEPLOYMENT OF ABOUT 2,000  TROOPS.  MOST ARE GOING TO BE HEADED  INTO POLAND, WHICH IS A NATO  MEMBER, AND ALREADY HOSTS  THOUSANDS OF NATO TROOPS IN ITS  TERRITORY.  ANOTHER 1,000 U.S. TROOPS  CURRENTLY STATIONED IN GERMANY  ARE GOING TO MOVE FARTHER EAST  TO ROMANIA.  THESE TROOPS ARE ESSENTIALLY  GOING NEARER, BUT NOT INTO THE  POTENTIAL CONFLICT ZONE.  THESE DEPLOYMENTS ARE ALL IN  ADDITION THAT PREVIOUSLY  ANNOUNCED 8,500 TROOPS THAT ARE  IN A STATE OF HEIGHTENED  READINESS, BUT STILL STATESIDE.  AND WHAT THE ADMINISTRATION HAS  SOUGHT TO EMPHASIZE THROUGHOUT  THIS PROCESS IS THAT NONE OF  THESE TROOPS IS EXPECTED TO  ACTUALLY FIGHT IN UKRAINE IN  THE EVENT OF AN INVASION.  THEY'RE BEING DEPLOYED PURELY  FOR DETERRENCE PURPOSES AND FOR  THE DEFENSE OF NATO COUNTRIES  SHOULD THE CONFLICT SPREAD  BEYOND UKRAINIAN BORDERS.  THAT SAID, OF COURSE, THE U.S.  AND EUROPEAN COUNTRIES HAVE  BEEN STEADILY SENDING DEFENSIVE  MILITARY EQUIPMENT INTO  UKRAINE, OFFERING TRAINING.  SO WHILE U.S. TROOPS WON'T BE  JOINING THE UKRAINIANS AT THE  FRONT, THE U.S. HAS BEEN  SEEKING TO BOLSTER UKRAINIAN  DEFENSES IN THE FACE OF A  POTENTIAL RUSSIAN ATTACK.  >> SO, O OLIVIA, THAT'S THE  PART THAT I THINK IS CONFUSING  FOR FOLKS, IS PRESIDENT BIDEN  SAID AMERICAN TROOPS ARE NOT  GOING TO BE FIGHTING IF THERE  IS A RUSSIAN INVASION, AND YET  WE'RE SEEING AMERICAN TROOPS GO  OVER THERE.  WHAT ROLE ARE THEY GOING TO  PLAY?  AND HOW DOES IT WORK FOR  DETERRENCE IF WE'RE SAYING THEY  ARE NOT GOING TO ENTER THE  BATTLEFIELD.  >> THEY ARE SAYING WE ARE GOING  TO DEFEND THESE TERRITORIES.  OF COURSE, UKRAINE, NOT BEING A  MEMBER, DOESN'T ENJOY THE  BENEFITS OF THE ARTICLE 5 PACT  THAT THESE OTHER COUNTRIES DO  ENJOY.  SO WHILE IT IS A PARTNER THAT  HAS BEEN GETTING SOME  REINFORCEMENTS FROM U.S. AND  NATO ALLIES, IT CAN'T BE PRIVY  TO THAT DEFENSIVE COALITION  THAT NATO MEMBERS OTHERWISE  ENJOY.  >> WELL, OLIVIA, EUROPEAN  ALLIES HAVE ALSO SCHEDULED  MEETINGS WITH THE LEADERS OF  RUSSIA AND UKRAINE NEXT WEEK.  TELL US, IS DEESCALATION  THROUGH DIPLOMACY A FEASIBLE  OPTION AT THIS POINT?  >> SURE.  SO WE'RE AT A POINT WHERE THERE  ARE REALLY TWO REALITIES IN  TENSION.  ONE IS THAT RUSSIA HAS  MANEUVERED ITSELF INTO A  POSITION WHERE IT HAS MULTIPLE  OPTIONS.  IT CAN LAUNCH ANYTHING FROM A  SMALL-SCALE INVASION INTO  EASTERN UKRAINE TO A MASSIVE  INVASION OF THE WHOLE OF  UKRAINE, ON SEVERAL FRONT SEAT,  AND ON VERY SHORT NOTICE.  THE SECOND REALITY IS RUSSIA IS  CONTINUING TO SHOW UP AT THESE  DIPLOMATIC CONVERSATIONS.  IT IS CONTINUING TO BE WILLING  TO TALK.  IN ADDITION THESE MEETINGS WITH  EUROPEAN LEADERS THIS WEEK, WE  ARE STILL WAITING ON A WRITTEN  RESPONSE FROM THE RUSSIANS TO  THE U.S. PROPOSAL THAT WAS SENT  OVER THERE LAST MONTH.  SO ONCE VLADIMIR PUTIN SIGNS  OFF ON THAT RESPONSE, WE'LL GET  SOME MORE CLARITY ON WHAT IS  DIPLOMATICALLY STILL POSSIBLE  VIS-A-VIS THE RUSSIANS.  ALL OF THAT IS ENCOURAGING; BUT  YOU KNOW, RUSSIA HAS BEEN  AMASSING MORE, NOT LESS  LEVERAGE, OVER THE PAST SEVERAL  MONTHS.  IT WAS ESPECIALLY EVIDENT  YESTERDAY, AS YOU HEARD, WE SAW  THIS WARMING AND DEEPENING OF  RUSSIA'S STRATEGIC  COLLABORATION WITH THE CHINESE,  THE TWO RELEASING THAT LENGTHY  JOINT STATEMENT THAT MADE VERY  CLEAR THEY'RE WILLING TO  PARTNER IN CERTAIN AREAS TO  SERVE AS A COUNTERBALANCE TO  THE U.S..  >> RIGHT.  >> SO THE MORE OPTIONS THAT  RUSSIA CONTINUES TO ACCUMULATE  FOR ITSELF, THE MORE DIFFICULT  IT IS GOING TO BE FOR WESTERN  DIPLOMATS TO ARRIVE AT SOME  SORT OF DIPLOMATIC RESOLUTION  THAT WILL STILL SATISFY  VLADIMIR PUTIN.  >> YEAH.  IT DOESN'T SEEM LIKE EITHER THE  DIPLOMACY OR THE TROOP BUILDUP  HAVE REALLY MADE MUCH OF A  DIFFERENCE IN TERMS OF  DEESCALATING THE CONFLICT.  AND, OLIVIA, I WANT TO ASK YOU  ABOUT SOMETHING ELSE.  OUR COLLEAGUE, KELLY WILLIAMS,  ANCHORED LIVE COVERAGE OF CBS  NEWS FROM UKRAINE FRIDAY, AND  SHE DETAILED RUSSIA'S PLANNING  OF STAGED VIDEO SHOWING AN  ATTACK FROM UKRAINE.  YOU ALSO HAVE BEEN REPORTING ON  THIS.  WHAT ARE YOUR SOURCES SAYING,  AND WHAT DOES THIS SAY ABOUT  MOSCOW'S TACTICS?  >> SURE.  THE LATEST DISCLOSURES THIS  WEEK CAME FROM THE WHITE HOUSE,  AND ARE BASED ON WHAT THEY SAID  WAS DECLASSIFIED INTELLIGENCE,  THAT RUSSIA HAD PLANS TO  RELEASE THIS ELABORATELY STAGED  VIDEO OF A UKRAINIAN LED ATTACK  ON RUSSIAN FORCES THAT WOULD  USE CORPORATIONS AND EMPLOY  MORNING ACTORS TO DRUM UP  OUTRAGE AND CREATE A PRETEXT OF  AN INVASION.  THIS COMES AS A RUSSIAN CREATED  PRETEXT ISN'T NOTHING NEW, BUT  THE DETAILS OF THIS RATHER  ELABORATELY CREATED VIDEO ARE.  WHILE IT'S FAR-FETCHED AND  THERE HAS BEEN WELL-PLACED  SKEPTICISM AMONG JOURNALISTS IN  PARTICULAR THAT THIS IS THE  CASE, WE KNOW RUSSIA IS PRETTY  MUCH A MASTER OF DECEPTION, HAS  PLENTY OF EXPERIENCE IN  CREATING FAKE VIDEOS AND  LAUNCHING DISINFORMATION  CAMPAIGNS AND ISSUING  PROPAGANDA IT USES TO STOKE  PUBLIC SENTIMENT.  SO THE ADMINISTRATION IS  SAYING, "WE ARE TELLING YOU AS  MUCH AS WE CAN TELL YOU WHILE  PROTECTING OUR SOURCES AND  METHODS SO THAT IF RUSSIA DOES  GO FORWARD WITH THIS PLAN, AS  FAR-FETCHED AS IT MIGHT BE, WE  WILL CALL IT OUT AND BLUNT ITS  EFFECTIVENESS, HOPEFULLY IN  ADVANCE."  >> LET'S SHIFT GEARS A LITTLE  BIT, BECAUSE I WANT TO DISCUSS  YOUR REPORTING ON THE ILLNESS  OF THE HAVANA SYNDROME.  THERE WAS A DECLASSIFIED  SUMMARY EARLIER THIS WEEK.  TELL OUR VIEWERS WHAT IT SAID.  >> SURE.  THIS WAS A PANEL THAT INCLUDED  SCIENTIFIC AND MEDICAL EXPERTS  INSIDE AND OUTSIDE THE  GOVERNMENT, AND THEY WERE  LOOKING SPECIFICALLY AT WHAT  COULD PHYSICALLY BE CAUSING THE  SYMPTOMS THESE VICTIMS ARE  EXPERIENCING, WHICH IS EAR  RINGING, NAUSEA, REALLY INTENSE  HEADACHES, SOMETIMES TRAUMATIC  BRAIN INJURY.  AND SO THEY WERE EXAMINING A  RANGE OF HIGHLY TECHNICAL  THINGS, LIKE ACOUSTIC SIGNALS,  CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL AGENTS,  AND VARIOUS FORMS OF ELECTRO  MAGNETIC ENERGY.  THEY WERE NOT LOOKING INTO WHO  OR WHAT COULD HAVE CAUSED THIS,  LIKE A FOREIGN GOVERNMENT.  AND WHAT THEY FOUND IS THAT  VICTIMS' SYMPTOMS COULD BE  PLAUSIBLY EXPLAINED BY PULSE  RADIO FREQUENCY ENERGY, OR  POSSIBLY ULTRASOUND, BUT THEY  SAID THAT INFORMATION GAP FOR  BOTH OF THOSE SCENARIOS EXIST.  THIS FINDING REAFFIRMS WHAT  PREVIOUS STUDIES HAVE FOUND  ABOUT THE POSSIBILITY OF  DIRECTED ENERGY, AND THAT'S  IMPORTANT, BECAUSE IT KIND OF  HOLDS OPEN THE POSSIBILITY  THERE IS SOME NEFARIOUS  TECHNOLOGY OR WEAPON AT PLAY  HERE.  BUT AT THE SAME TIME, IT  DOESN'T REALLY -- IT'S NOT  SUPER CONCLUSIVE, AND IT  DOESN'T REALLY BREAK ANY NEW  GROUND IN TERMS OF EXPLAINING  WHAT EXACTLY IS CAUSING THESE  SYMPTOMS.  >> STILL |||[Music] I think that we are the most hopeful country in the European Union right now and I can feel it on the street even yesterday I was attacked two times proportional Proserpine stop movie chato lucha Italia SpA proscuitto loggia I met with her - told you that apiece dehumanising cat solving there pictures of kids that commit suicide because of homophobia he's not thinking about us as a human being he is thinking about us as a tool to reach his political goals we know from surveys that 70% of teenagers LGBT teenagers are suffering of the suicide tots half of them have symptoms of depression so this is the real problem and that politicians are aware of but they're doing nothing about this [Applause] so we just arrived to the coins Kavala which is one of the LGBT free zones one of manicure e indelible skip ravines this is a small town but still they just last year introduced a new bill which is the bill against so-called LGBT ideology we had seen many LGBT free zone that was created as a some kind of strategy made by lot justice party which goal was to demonize us stigmatize us to show us as an enemy they simply want to fight it to close us in the closet [Music] [Music] some of those are empty signs because there was nobody crave enough to do meet with me so there's just empty sign of people who are scared to be in my project to consolidate his base Judah invokes a nationalist program condemning the country's LGBT rights movement as a foreign ideology more destructive than communism they are not responsible government they are just laying with human being as puppets hurts [Music] I was bitten a few times in my life it started in my primary school I was getting few times in the school because I'm I don't like to play football while they prefer to dance there was only one one way of living that I'm a man so I have to have a wife and have a lot of children there was no way of thinking that I can be with the other men and that we can love each other I realized that I'm gay when I was 19 so like quite late it didn't become a gay I was gay all my life young LGBT people if you hear that you are ideology that you are not the human beings remember that it's not about you so you are normal future will be better [Music] [Applause] very much in doubt this is a very close election on the last day of campaign before polls they decide who they're going to vote for on Sonia [Applause] someone you give the time so I hope that there will be many people who vote and that will make this change happening [Music] I vote for over the other on us he was the only left-wing candidate that is for LGBT rights fully not specially at some of conduct our so I vote for him and we don't see what will be in the second round it will be just costly as everybody says I will vote for just Koski they all are dirty Savannah Petronius tickles Glenda charge of naming Savini personally me secure after you forget from house eyes [Music] [Music] yes [Music] [Music] Italian yes introduced of animal contact abandoned in American with a shaky stood my peaceful|||Katy and I are dessert lovers. So when we heard that there is a Gingerbread City in 
Poland it soared to the top of our must-see list. Especially when we learned we could participate 
in the making of these treats. Today we visit Toruń. One of the most beautiful and historic cities in Poland. Its medieval core was decorated a
 UNESCO world heritage site in 1997. But today's video is for all the gingerbread lovers like us. The very first item we have is our gingerbread latte. And the vibes in there are super awesome. Great spot to just chill for a little bit. They had other gingerbread items but we saw another gingerbread treat we want to go try next. And that would be paired greatly with this latte. But let's go ahead and take a sip of the latte 
before all this beautifulness disappears. We have a donut here. And I thought it was going to be gingerbread filling. But it's actually gingerbread dough. You can select what kind of filling you want. There's multi fruit. There's plum. But we went with black currant which sounds really fun. I think we had a Fanta like that in East Africa once. So let's see what this donut tastes like. I ripped this in half because usually you have to take several bites before you get to the filling. And I don't want to waste your guys's time. Things in Poland are unique for my American palette. Because I'm used to everything being super sugary. So in America the dough would have sugar in it. The filling would have tons of sugar and the icing on top of that. Here the gingerbread tastes like gingerbread. But it's just more like a proper piece of bread. And the filling is nice and flavorful without being overly sweet. And then all the sugar and the sweetness comes from the icing. So it's really nice and flavorful without
 giving you a major sugar rush. Do you have patches? Pin? Not pin. Patches. Like to sew? Yes. Toruń? Oh she has patches, yeah. But these are Poland. I think she has some of the city. That would be great. Yeah look at all the gingerbread things. That's so cute. Yeah, so these are magnets. Oh, the original shape. Original gingerbread shape. Oh nice! What is it called? So it should be a crest maybe? This is a crest? [Didn't understand.] Okay. Do you have a gingerbread patch? No only this. Okay. All right then yeah we'll definitely get this. If we happen to find a gingerbread one that'd be cool too. But if not, we have our patch. We just wanted to know. What is the history of the gingerbread? These gingerbreads were produced
 here until the first World War. And in late 19th century. Early 20th century. That was the biggest factory of gingerbread in the whole world. Wow! That's cool. Yeah, you could find these gingerbreads even in... In Tokyo. In Honolulu Hawaii. Appeared here around 14th century. We're used to different shapes. 
So where did they get the shape with the six circles? Or however do you describe it? There is the whole legend about it. One legend is about a young baker. Who decided to make two hearts and two rings for Kate. That's like his girlfriend. He put all these shapes too close to each other. Okay. And that's why it's this shape. We've got two gingerbreads over here. One that's chocolate covered. One that's normal. Let's try them. True gingerbread. Not covered with sugar. Not covered with anything extra. Just pure gingerbread. Like a biscuit more than a cookie. There's a couple times we've had gingerbread 
cookies from the Christmas markets. And they just have all that sugary icing on top. Which I don't like. This I do like. Now let's try the chocolate covered one. I like this one because it gives it a little bit of 
an extra chocolate sweetness to it. But it's not milk chocolate. It tastes like a dark chocolate. I do think I like this one better. We have a plate full of pierogi. And not just any pierogi. But oven baked pierogi. We heard about this by doing our research. Through reading comments on other YouTubers. And a lot of you guys recommended 
to get these oven baked pierogi. So we have a fall / winter menu. And on this fall / winter menu were the pierogi that we got. Which are filled with red lentils, cheese,
 spinach, and mushrooms. Now we have five of these pierogi for 32 złoty. And they are massive. We have had the traditional boiled pierogi before. And they're about half the size. Maybe a third of the size of these. And I'm really excited to try these. I already broke one in half. And it's definitely a lot harder. And very warm. They just came out of the oven. So let's give this a taste. That packs a flavor for sure. And the outside reminds me of just 
a dough that you would make in the oven. Now they did give us a sauce that you can pick. And I asked which one would go well with these. And they said the garlic one. So I'm going to dip this into the sauce and try it. Okay. So this is a garlic dill sauce actually. And this does complement the lentils very well. Now I definitely recommend when you're in Poland to try not only the boiled pierogi but also the oven baked pierogi. Doesn't work either. I started hearing stuff. We're supposed to be hearing English. Didn't hear anything. Don't hear anything. So before we start making gingerbread. Let's get to know each other a little bit. Who's here for working? But be honest. Who is hungry? OH! [Laughter] So, my name is Paul. I am a gingerbread master. And together we will teach you. At least try... How we bake gingerbread here in Toruń. Did you wash your hands before the work? Does hand sanitiser count? Squeeze it. Squeeze it. You can smell it. It's 12 week old gingerbread dough. The same dough but after three months. Place it in a ball. On the table. And roll in the flour. Roll the dough in the flour. Make it flat. In a few moments we will be rolling it. Flatter. Make it flat. Place the mold next to your dough. Take the dough in your hands and now
 place the dough on the mold. Oil side on the picture.  Oh perfect! Good job! Okay! Awesome! In 10 minutes I think I will call you. Oh my gosh! It looks so good! You've done this before? Couldn't have done it without your help. Thank you. You're welcome. It looks very nice. It about 8 minutes it will be ready. I love hands-on things. We just finished at the gingerbread museum. It was absolutely worth it. It was so much fun. It was so interactive. We not only were able to be hands-on and make gingerbread... Which this is gingerbread you don't eat. It's just a souvenir. Prior to that they kind of explain the
 process of gingerbread making. And the people that we're hosting it... it kind of felt like a show. They were dressed up. And unfortunately they gave us some headsets to 
listen to the translation in English. Those weren't working. But I think it worked out in our favor because the people were just going back and forth between Polish and English. And they spoke great English. And they were just very fun. And everyone in the room was having a blast. So yeah it was a great time and we absolutely loved it. We're currently down in the dungeon. Well I guess cellar. But that is because everyone was incredibly kind who works here and they allowed us to come down here. Since there's a lot of copyright music
 upstairs and in the loft area. So we're down here kind of all by ourselves. But we're still getting great service and we're really excited because we have two different gingerbread beers. There's one that is cold. And that one is a dark barley beer. With the aroma of spices and a hint of
 cardamom, cloves, and cinnamon. And it's won all kinds of awards. And then the second beer that we're gonna try is a mulled beer. And that is hot as most mulled beverages are. And it has the addition of cloves and orange. So let's try our gingerbread beer; the cold one. All day we've had a lot of different gingerbread things. And most things aren't overpowering with the taste of ginger. Which is probably better. Now let's try the mulled gingerbread beer. You smell the... It's almost impossible to stir in the cinnamon. So you definitely smell the cinnamon and the rest of the spices. But mostly cinnamon. That's a whole lot of flavors. Maybe because the orange is sitting
 here at the top I definitely taste orange. Is maybe the strongest flavor. And then like a hint of gingerbread. Both very good. I think though I like the traditional gingerbread a little bit better. Also I don't know if they have this everywhere. And I don't know if they have this back in the States. But we got a gingerbread Twix. So in the convenience stores they have regular Twix. They also have some salted caramel. And they have the gingerbread cookie Twix. So we're gonna try that too since 
we're here in the gingerbread city. As George Costanza would say, 'Twix is
 the only candy with a cookie crunch'. And this one also has gingerbread cookie. So the difference between packaged Twix 
and everything else we've had here... Is you could definitely taste a lot of sugar. And you can definitely taste a very
 strong flavor of the gingerbread. Much more powerful than anything else we've had today. But I like it... Nicholas Copernicus was born in Toruń in 1473.   This home now houses a museum dedicated to his work. Copernicus had many fields of interest including astronomy, mathematics, and economics. Just to name a few. He wrote 'On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres.' This mathematically explained that the planets, 
including the Earth, orbit around the Sun. And that the Earth rotates daily on its axis. The idea that Toruń is a gingerbread city is not a legend. It is very real. We had gingerbread coffee, pastries, and beer. If you love gingerbread like we do, 
you have to add this city to your bucket list. Thank you for watching this video. This is WITY TRAVELS. What could possibly be next?|||shave your beard you look like an idiot me shave these boobs you happy now [Applause] you bought me a helicopter we flew very much not aspect okay okay oh right so I found this video online it's called a thousand years of Poland in five minutes personally I am very very interested I'm very intrigued about learning about the Polish history there my country that I was born in and I know Polish people are very passionate about their history it's like pop tarts for Americans so yeah let's just get right into it and see what this is all about I'm very happy to be learning today it is an educational video - Sean's a lot Polsky ledge good okay so Poland's only been around before it look bullet still looks the same what what your is this 1039 and pull it still over the same spot well I look at look at this map so I just want to pause this for a second only stuff that looks like similar is like France Spain still there Muslim Spain what anyway but Poland politically the same damn spot forever thousand years what this is crazy I'm very happy to be learning this I'm sorry I didn't heard about this before but I just never had the chance to learn about this I never went out of my way to learn about that he served my over my country and I feel like a dumbass uh England's the same Scotland's the same Ireland's somewhat the same in Norway Estonia is still the same but there's a lot of countries I've never heard of back picnic what's the run the Empire was huge yo Kiev aru's Kiev and ruse here I'm guessing that's likely what Ukraine used to be or something I so turn off jealousy pleasure Hungary move down to spoon lose groan zero oh how many territorial changes are going on oh my god it's only been 200 years and and shit's been changing I feel like I'm at a rave party like everything is just changing colors and everything hunger is [ __ ] huge by the way can we just talk about how big Hungary is to be these guys were hungry for territory huh go home girl room darling countries that seem like they're doing all right his friends in England everyone else is just like changing like a [ __ ] Lithuania though jeez good on you man Republic of novo - god no no no God Paul it licked away now what that joint holy [ __ ] look at Poland Poland's the biggest country there man this is the interesting spot I don't know if it's interesting for you to watching me to react to this but to me I'm just like damn oh that's Russia Russia just carry him I don't notice exactly when Spain it's not Muslim spend anymore Portugal great starting to look more like wait whoa what are all these little territories I've completely skipped on looking at that what is going on there it looks like it looks like I'm looking at like some kind of brain cells or some [ __ ] what is that is that different countries different territories all over the place that just looks like a mess bro that is just a mess that is a mess if my mom saw that she would be like latest and pop queen Raja just took a vote hold up Russia just playing some agario right here look at that [ __ ] they just ate like two countries like warm up that's crazy whoa Paula just [ __ ] Luciana off huh [ __ ] we're at 1,000 1600 and [ __ ] it's going wild what is it 1600 optional musky poof million so this is the biggest that Poland's ever been and dude looks [ __ ] huge Breyer I think Poland is the biggest country here besides Russia easily or you'd look at these [ __ ] taking over the territory you [ __ ] you think you're doing it was Italy by the way kingdom of Naples it must have been so hot look at all these changes in what whoa oh [ __ ] imagine living back then it's like if you if you live in this spot right there and like this [ __ ] just keeps happening you're like where the [ __ ] do you live imagine just buying [ __ ] online you have to like keep changing the address every five years bro that's [ __ ] up [Music] it's still a big mess in the middle there I'm waiting for that to clean up Great Britain's done well good on you man 1700 I still don't see Italy Italy you came late as [ __ ] or what 1008 780 where's Jeremy by the way Jeremy didn't exist back then huh interesting Oh boiling just go [ __ ] here by meteorite oh whoa whoa what what [ __ ] what a poet go I remember this Boland didn't exist for like a hundred years they're like slaves to to brush ow [ __ ] whatever but that's that's crazy Oh hunger he's [ __ ] doing well I'm surprised Hungary's nada no hunger was like such a such a good fighter man [Music] [Music] sorry gays little interference all right so what's going on here Germany Germany just popped up right there Serbia Bulgaria Romania it's time to look more modern Italy came through okay first world war holy [ __ ] a lot just happened in like one second all right let's take this slowly please so Germany war look at Germany virgin Poland's back for the first world war changed a lot like it changed the whole map almost crazy they kind of stabilized a lot of things though I would say damn Germany the [ __ ] my life yo Hitler just [ __ ] [ __ ] up [Music] right so this is more of the motor map we have East Germany West Germany after the war that was split obviously and then Poland pretty much yet but let's say it's the same but this is like 20 years ago look at all the changes within the last 20 years Ukraine didn't exist 1990 that's crazy that's [ __ ] crazy Oh [Music] damn so that's it wow what a journey that was I thoroughly enjoyed that that was actually awesome seen like Europe change the hell a lot it makes you wonder like is it gonna change any more than already has I mean surely it has to like people back then probably thought oh this is how it's gonna be it's stable it wasn't and now thinking it's stable it isn't I'm very curious to see what the future is gonna be like so I'm actually make like a simulation of like the future of Europe Derby fire I would [ __ ] watch this [ __ ] up I would definitely love to watch that charity whoever made that was very awesome if you guys want more content let me know I appreciate you giving oh god damn it I really appreciate you giving me a few minutes of your time to watch this video if you did enjoy this content please make sure to subscribe Anna hit double button also follow my Instagram you'll find release the grandmother the username of at Tommy dot crazed uh-huh I would appreciate if you follow me there too and till next time yes James Yom peace out the rock stars you|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||handcuff that naomi was kind 
enough to put her head in babushka does your pigeon friend have a name magda 
both of us hit our heads a little bit   i've just been whacking my head off 
of things let's break into a church what's up you guys and welcome back to the channel 
last evening we were kind of trying to see what   we could possibly shoot a video about today so we 
just kind of went on google to have a look around   which cities are in close proximity to Łódź and 
we found one city which is called Łęczyca   i hope i pronounced that one right because when we 
were trying to order the tickets for this train   the lady did not understand where we were trying 
to go but uh i'm pretty sure it's wish it's now apparently in this polish town that we 
are headed to it is slightly north of Łódź   and there's only apparently around 13 000 
inhabitants in this town so it's definitely   off the grid it's off the beaten path we thought 
initially when we went to Łódź that that was off   the beaten path but now we're going the extra 
mile here and bringing you guys somewhere that   is really not often visited or shown on youtube 
or by any tourists in general very loud here in   this train because the window beside us is open 
and the train is already picking up some speed   as you can probably see this is blowing 
into front of me here but check this out welcome to Łęczyca we just had a little bit 
of an ordeal getting off the train there   polish woman very friendly came in and 
started asking for help to get off the train   i understand very we understand very little 
polish but i understood that she needed help   so we went to try and assist her and she turns out 
she was very confused he tried to get off on the   wrong side of the train and was literally going 
out onto the tracks it turned out you had to go   out the other door it was manual doors to open the 
doors like you literally have to turn the handles   just to open the door and give it a good 
strong push and there's this really weird noise that is coming out of all the speakers here at 
the train station but yeah welcome to Łęczyca   um this is a very interesting train 
station let alone as a first impression of   this place and as i said very very few people 
are in are inhabiting here are living here   so it should be an interesting day apparently 
there is some cool stuff to check out like castles   and stuff like that so it's definitely definitely 
things that we typically will go for and we have   beautiful weather today once again the polish 
summer is finally here now if you're wondering   or if you're my if you are wandering around europe 
and you end up getting lost there's two ways that   you can make sure that you are in a polish town or 
polish city and that is one if there is a Biedronka   two if there's a Żabka and we just discovered 
Biedronka so we're gonna go and get some snacks now the town of Łęczyca is one of the oldest towns 
in all of poland with it being mentioned for the   very first time in the 12th century i believe it 
was 1180 it was mentioned for the very very   first time and right now we are directly here 
at the royal castle of Łęczyca as you can see   directly behind me this castle was completely 
destroyed around 1707 because of the swedish   occupation here and after that the locals of 
Łęczyca kind of used the gravels and everything the   ruins that was there as material to build their 
own houses so that castle was completely destroyed   after a while and everybody was kind of taking 
whatever they needed in order to build their   houses and then in 1964 this castle was completely 
built from scratch to resemble the castle that was   here before this castle is truly magnificent and 
we luckily managed to get the drone up in the   air and capture some birds eye shots over the 
castle itself and over the town and this place   is actually really very pretty there's plenty 
of red brick architecture going on around here   and you can tell that a lot has happened in this 
place throughout history and funnily enough facing   the castle itself is a Żabka and a Biedronka 
so kind of just proves my point really welcome to   poland now this castle from the outside is really 
really beautiful with the red brick exterior and   to be honest if i wouldn't have read beforehand 
that it was kind of rebuilt from scratch you   wouldn't really know that that is the case it kind 
of just looks like you know every other castle and   that is from the 12th century obviously it has 
its own details and it's very very unique to this   place but you wouldn't necessarily think that it's 
not from that time we just after walking into the   entrance of this castle and we bumped into nigel 
thornberry look-alike i don't know if any of you   guys watching um our channel are familiar with 
the thornberry's very famous cartoon from when   me and naomi or naomi and i were children 
and this is kind of almost like a look-alike   of nigel thornberry look up the show really 
funny show just after you walk in the entrance   of the castle you are greeted by this very cool 
looking garden there are hundreds of swallows flying just above us right now it's very cool   and the acoustics in here in the garden kind 
of amplifies those birds but there's plenty   of things out here in the garden to check out 
like there's a kind of an old-school handcuff   that naomi was kind enough to put her head 
in and we are also going to go and check out   the museum itself it's around 28 złoty per 
person to go inside and we should be able to   go up to this cool looking tower as well so let's 
go and check this museum out and see what's inside Be careful with your head. It was my shoulder. My god, there is no space. check how claustrophobic it is in here for me 
it's all right i'm a little bit on the wide side   but both of my shoulders are touching either 
of the walls we're going up a tower should be   interesting fortunately a lot of the signs here 
are in just polish but it's very interesting like good spirits that's what i understood 
like it because she said it looks like the   devil like the other yeah but it's 
a good one it's not actual devil ah   yeah yeah that's what i understood squeaky floors this is very cool very unique pronunciation on point you can see the different outfits that 
people used to wear back in these ages okay so that woman was trying to give us a little 
bit of a lecture as to what what is obviously   with our very little polish and she wasn't really 
speaking any english either she spoke a little   bit of german so she kind of knew good gut 
and zurück and all of these things but she   didn't knew that much and we obviously don't know 
any polish so it was a little bit difficult but   they were actually not good spirits i think as 
far as we understood it was kind of more of a   situation of sins or something like that like 
these little devils were behaving obviously like   a devil and they were like lifting up the skirt 
of the women and acting as if it's the wind or   kind of touching women in a weird way all of 
these things so it was not good spirits no   idea what it actually was though yeah that was 
a very interesting interaction with that woman   we still don't really have much of a 
clue as to what's going on here but   it's very interesting there's plenty of things to 
check out and now we're on our way up to a tower   which supposedly has some pretty nice views over 
the garden that we were just standing in there not   so long ago it's very dark in here but this is one 
section of the tower and a few spooky images here   i don't know if you're going to get them on 
the gopro but hopefully we can capture some   with other cameras that we brought with us   the lighting in here is not on our side right now 
guys but check this view out out of this window it's obviously a cage over the window so it's 
not the best but we have a little bit more   to scale up to get to the top of this tower 
after a few of those really really dark   little staircases we are basically there 
that's the exit of the tower where we will have   a nice view i hope the staircase 
is very steep trying to get up here comes the sun here comes the sun and i say who are 
you talking to you there's a pigeon hello pigeon hello that's pigeon language for get on my finger yeah we made it all the way to the top you can 
see that's the top of the tower there directly   behind us and from here you have an amazing view 
all over the city but also a lot of fields wait   i'm trying to find the best angle to show you 
guys oh yeah now you see how green Poland is when we went up here there was kind 
of still another group down there and   they were shouting from the tower to the 
people down there and back and forth like unfortunately they're gone 
now so we cannot scream woohoo   i would like to scream yeah that's 
definitely something that i wouldn't do but yeah this tower is cool the museum is cool 
definitely worth a visit this place is roughly   around 40-45 minutes are no more like an hour 
or so away from Łódź by train we just took the   ice train or icc train incredibly cheap 
actually to get out to this random polish town   cost us twenty zloty twenty slotty for two people 
it was ten złoty per person for the train   and the museum here was 28 złoty per 
person yeah so it was more expensive to   come in here but this place is very much worth 
the 28 zloty that's i think it's around five   euro per person to come in here and check this 
place out this tower view alone by itself is   worth that money um and the walk up as well 
is pretty unnerving if you are claustrophobic   beware because it is very narrow and 
tight but if you are afraid of heights   like i am you will be fine because it is 
claustrophobic there's no like free fall drops   or anything like that it's just very very narrow 
small it's claustrophobic not highophobic yes   both of us hit our heads a little bit on 
the way down so I'm 5'10 or 178   in the metric system if you're anywhere close to 
that make sure to protect your head at all costs   when you walk down that staircase obviously luke 
is a lot taller and i think he hit his head a lot   more and harder than i did yeah i nearly i 
actually went down the stairs ahead of naomi   um i literally went head first into one of the 
walls i don't know if you can see it very well   because i shaved my head i actually shaved my 
head while we were in krakow and ever since i've   shaved my head i've just been whacking my head 
off of things for some weird reason so i have   loads of bumps and bruises and scars and stuff 
like that that are just accumulating on my scalp   but nonetheless that place it was pretty epic we're very glad that we took the train   out here to Łęczyca this place is Łęczyca Łęczyca Łęczyca Łęczyca  it's very much off the beaten path and there 
is so few people that are actually living here   so very much well worth the day trip because it's 
not somewhere that people typically would think   of coming to and checking out but that's 
exactly why we come to places like this   it's actually why we initially came to Łódź 
because Łódź was so like so many people were   just like don't go to Łódź don't go to Łódź 
don't go to Łódź and we're like okay we're going   to go to Łódź same thing with Katowice don't go 
there people were saying and then we went there   and then when we come to places like this we 
just have this sort of like a nomadic need   inside of us to continue exploring deeper into 
these relatively unknown territories and every   single time that we go off of the beaten path we 
are rewarded with beautiful places and beautiful   towns such as this one so we just arrived 
at the Rynek or the main market square and   very little very few people wandering around 
the market square of Łęczyca very quaint   in comparison to a lot of the Ryneks that we've 
seen so far obviously because of the small size   of this place nonetheless very beautiful great 
weather and we are on our way now to a Żabka to   get some quick refreshments and then on we go 
to explore more of this little town it's hot this town is really something that we didn't 
actually expect when we picked it out randomly   on google maps and decided to hop 
on the train from Łódź to here   we kind of had this picture of a totally you know 
middle of nowhere countryside type of a situation   but there's actually plenty of stuff going on 
and there is quite a few people buzzing around   we walked past in the Rynek there the main square 
we walked past a couple of cafes and there was   plenty of people out there just enjoying a 
nice cup of coffee on the friday afternoon   having some ice cream and stuff like that 
because the weather is truly amazing and tomorrow   believe it or not we are headed to a totally new 
place that is just north of where we are in Łódź   we're very very excited if you have 
watched this far and if you appreciate   what we do we kindly ask you to hit 
that red subscribe button because we are   trying to grow ourselves all the way as far as we 
can and build ourselves a nice polish audience so   on to the next stop here and this church 
looks absolutely stunning check it out so our next stop here is the 
church of saint andrew the apostle   we want to go inside as well to check it out 
but i will have to put on a jacket because   usually they don't like it 
as much in poland if you wear   just like a dress you show your shoulders or a 
hat so if you ever go inside of a church make sure   to bring something to cover yourself up 
and if you're a man try not to wear a hat looks like it's closed maybe there's another 
entrance but the main entrance seems to be locked didn't have any luck we're getting into this one 
but as naomi said yeah hopefully there is another   way of getting into this church because there's no 
better way of discovering a new town or a new city   than going and checking out the church 
or any church that is in the area because   it's a very quick way of learning 
the history and traditions   of the culture in the town or city that you're 
visiting so that's what we're trying to do   we're going to try and get in here but 
right now it doesn't look too promising i think we've made it inside i'm not sure are we sneaking into a church it's 
okay to go in or no yeah no ah okay unfortunately not today we're not 
going to be checking out this church   but um the canon or priest or pastor i'm not sure 
what his rank was but he kindly let us know that   the church is closed didn't really understand 
what exactly the reason the reasoning was   but unfortunately the church is closed we almost 
went in the fire exit i think in the back of the   church let's break into a church what a what 
a way to get into a whole bunch of trouble   we've only been in this town now for 
around two hours or so and we're already   getting ourselves into a whole bunch of trouble 
nonetheless the church from the outside is   absolutely beautiful it's very unique looking and 
it is something that kind of characterizes a lot   of poland poland and historically is a very strong 
catholic belief system all throughout the ages   poland has been rooted historically in catholic 
beliefs similar as my home country of ireland   i'm from ireland myself naomi is half german 
half italian so very catholic it is just the   religion of choice but unfortunately today we're 
not going to experience that side of Łęczyca   i was however able to at least capture through 
the entrance door there is a little bit of glass   on the entrance door what the church looks like 
from the inside and it looks very very cool so   if you are ever here in this beautiful village 
and you get the chance to see the church from   the inside definitely try and do it because 
it looks absolutely stunning i think generally   here in this village it's probably not super 
common to have tourists visited so a lot of   people are genuinely curious anyway as to 
who we are and what we're doing here and   why we don't speak polish but right 
now luke is flying the drone there   just behind me here and there are a lot of people 
that are very confused as to why there is a drone   in the Rynek or the market square here or Rynek 
i actually don't know how to pronounce that   but a lot of people are very very curious and 
you see kind of everybody is looking like what   is happening why is there a drone um but we 
have some really cool drone shots for you   let's go now in the center itself it really feels 
like the village kind of is organically grown   nice little idyllic village and then 
when you get closer to the train station   you have all of these large buildings that kind 
of look like they were built somewhere in between   1970s and probably the early 2000s obviously 
they're accommodating a lot more people than the   little one family type of homes that you can 
see in the market square unfortunately this is   directly at the train station so if you do arrive 
as a tourist your first reaction is a little bit   like oh okay where am i but all of these areas 
nevertheless seem very safe and very idyllic and   nice so it's all right the not so glamorous 
life of travel vloggers we decided to make our   way back to the train station and try and catch 
the train which we planned on getting back to  Łódź but we missed it we were kind of too focused a 
little bit on capturing this town and trying to   get across to you just how undiscovered 
so many different places are in poland   and unfortunately we spent a little bit too long 
we ended up running back here to this station and   we missed the train by literally around two or 
three minutes and because of the fact that we are   very far away from a lot of the main cities in 
poland there's not much connectivity going on here   the next train is in roughly around two and 
a half hours so we're gonna be sitting here   in the shade trying to stay out of the sun because 
i think i'm a little bit sunburnt but nonetheless   very productive very good day great place 
definitely somewhere that you guys need to   come and check out we will be waiting here for a 
while and then we're gonna jump on this train stay   with us all the way until the end because we do 
have a little bit more to chat about on the train still waiting all right guys so it has been around 
three and a half hours since the last time   that i spoke to you guys or we spoke to you guys 
and the time that our train was supposed to come   has passed it's actually around half an 
hour after our train is supposed to come   and there is still no sign of a train we are 
just sitting here in the sun kind of baking away   i went up and asked someone if they spoke 
english unfortunately they didn't but i   tried to use google translate just to see if 
they had any information about getting back   to Łódź and if there would be a train soon but 
unfortunately no sign so we are currently stranded   in this little town outside of Łódź 
right now fingers crossed that we get   a train back to this place because tomorrow we 
are supposed to be checking out of our airbnb   so we do not want to end up having to book a hotel 
in this random city and having to stay out here we   have nothing with us we came unprepared we have no 
phone chargers we have very little cash and both   of our phones are on like 10% battery right now 
so it's not going well it's not going well the   day itself was fine this place is beautiful 
but we are currently stranded sitting on a   platform and we have no idea what's going on so 
hopefully we'll be on the train now in a second we're on a train can you believe it we're 
finally on the train but we took a different   kind of train so usually like 
we were supposed to take the ic   and now like a different kind of local train 
arrived and we just decided to take that one   and we bought another set of tickets but that's 
all right i just want to get home at this stage long wait around almost four hours in total that 
we were waiting at that station we made it and   this was a fun trip definitely worth it but the 
extra delay with the train and stuff like that   kind of added a little bit of stress for us but 
luckily we are now on our way back to Łódź it   was a great day it was a great town and a good 
experience definitely something that we encourage   you guys to do and something we always try and 
encourage you guys to do with our channel is to   get off the beaten track of where tourists go to 
for sure make sure to add this one to your list   also this is just kind of the stuff that you 
can tell stories about i kind of feel like   when everything goes well and everything is 
super great you don't really have a story to   tell so now we have a story to tell um 
for the last like one and a half years   that we have been traveling and things have 
been going wrong these are usually the type   of trips that we do remember a lot more 
than when everything just went smoothly we made it we made it my god guys what a long day 
of exploring around it was definitely well worth   it we are more than happy to be back at our place 
the sun is just going down but golden hour wow   what a day and we hope you guys enjoyed this 
video for now my name is luke my name is naomi   we are the two mad explorers and this is your 
reminder to keep exploring see you guys in the   next video thanks for watching ciao thanks very 
much for watching this video we just launched our   community our channel memberships here on youtube 
so if you want to be part of this community make   sure to check out the benefits and perks down 
below all of this is only possible because of   you guys and with your support we will 
be able to keep going for a lot longer|||Under the cover of darkness on September 7th,
1512, near the village of Pashino, deep in Muscovite territory, a group of Poles were building
pontoon bridges on the Dnieper in order to cross the river. Next to them, smaller groups of light cavalry swam
across and proceeded to dry their clothes and armour. Infantrymen floated on rafts to reach the
left bank of the river, while the main part of the Polish-Lithuanian army waited for the
construction of the bridges to be completed. Once the engineers completed the job, parts
of the infantry started to cross the bridge, followed by cannons and heavy cavalry. But… unable to carry the weight, one of
the bridges collapsed. Despite these difficulties, by early morning
the Polish-Lithuanian army, totalling 30,000 men, was ready to move east to recapture the
important Lithuanian fortress of Smolensk. But… in front of them stood the Muscovite
army, twice as big, and deployed in battle formation. The  Grand  Duchy of Lithuania united with Poland in 1386,
under the rule of the Jagiellon dynasty. This powerful new state was comprised of Polish,
Lithuanian, and Ruthenian lands, as well as territories conquered in the East by the Lithuanian
dukes over the course of the fourteenth century. This expansion, however, clashed with the
ambitions of a new emerging power in Eastern Europe. The Muscovite princes had finally thrown off
the Mongol yoke, which lasted for nearly TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY years. It was now time to look outwards. Their objective was to unite all lands populated
by the Ruthenian- and Russian-speaking peoples, but this would have to come at the expense
of Lithuania. And, during the rule of the Grand Prince Vasili
III, Moscow’s western expansion pushed the border to the Dnieper river. This drastic shift in the balance of power
convinced the King of Poland, Sigismund I, who had until now largely stayed out of any
conflicts in the East, to intervene. But Sigismund faced a problem. During the early 16th century, the kingdom’s
General Parliament grew into a powerful political institution, becoming one of the primary elements
of democratic governance in the Polish dominion. This limited the power of the Crown. Without Parliament approval, the King could
no longer unilaterally pass new laws, nor freely use the kingdom’s annual tax income
for military spending. In effect, Sigismund was not able to wield
the same power his predecessors once could. Complicating matters further, in 1512, Albert
of Prussia became the new Grand Master of the Teutonic Order and had refused to acknowledge
Poland’s suzerainty, thus breaking an oath of fealty to the Polish King. Worse, to alleviate pressure on Lithuania,
Sigismund plotted with the Crimean Khan to attack the Grand Duchy of Moscow from the
south – a plot that Vasili’s spies had uncovered. Pretext in hand, the Grand Prince was not
about to pass up on the opportunity to take advantage of the changing political dynamics
in Poland to continue Moscow’s territorial expansion. He tasked the Boyar Ivan Andreyevich Chelyadnin
with supervising the campaign to take the strategically vital city of Smolensk. This city was of huge strategic importance
for Vasili, because to attack Moscow, any hostile army that was located further west
would have to pass right through Smolensk. Worse, while in enemy hands, this well-fortified
city also threatened the military endeavours of the Russians, so the one who controlled
it held a very favorable strategic position. At the time of this attack, the Muscovites
also tried to attack Polotsk, but this was unsuccessful, so these forces were diverted
towards the siege of Smolensk. In the meantime, a little further south, the
Grand Hetman of Lithuania Konstanty Ostrogski invaded Moscow’s territory and inflicted
heavy defeats on the Muscovite army in the region of Severia in several smaller battles. Here he defeated about 6000 Russians. But with the small number of troops at his
disposal, he could not oppose the main army of Vasili III that besieged Smolensk. A six- and four-week siege followed in 1513,
both unsuccessful, but the Muscovite forces succeeded in taking the city in July 1514,
dealing a serious blow to Lithuania. Encouraged by their success, the Russians
conquered several smaller fortresses in the surrounding area and despite their large army,
they decided to stop there. After the fall of the most important Lithuanian
fortress on the eastern border, the focus of the Polish parliament and nobility was
finally directed towards the war with the Grand Duchy of Moscow. After long preparations during the summer
of 1514, the King of Poland and the Grand Duke of Lithuania gathered around 35,000 soldiers
under his command. The soldiers primarily came from Poland and
Lithuania and were mostly horsemen, but certain mercenary contingents also joined the campaign,
along with volunteer detachments from Bohemia. Most importantly, large numbers of artillery
pieces were gathered to help recapture the lost fortress of Smolensk. From Vilnius, the Polish-Lithuanian army moved
south-east and stopped at Minsk to unite with units arriving from all over the country. After Minsk, Sigismund continued towards the
eastern border to confront the Muscovites. Soon he reached the city of Borisov, a key
crossing over the imposing Berezina river. There, he handed over command of the majority
of the army to Hetman Konstanty Ostrogski, while he remained in this position with about
5,000 men. Ostrogski continued with the main army towards
the Dnieper River, which he had to cross in order to recapture city of Smolensk. Meanwhile, Ivan Chelyadnin, having learned
about the movement of the enemy, had gathered the scattered Muscovite troops and decided
to confront the Polish-Lithuanian Army. However, his scouts reported that Ostrogski
had a fairly large host under his command, so Chelyadnin decided to receive the battle
in a more favourable position. He retreated from Drutsk even further east
while slowing down the enemy's advance with smaller detachments. Then he crossed the Dnieper River and developed
his battle positions to meet the enemy. The town of Orsha was a suitable river crossing
due to the existence of two bridges in close proximity, which allowed for a quick transfer
of troops. This was precisely what the Russian commanders
counted on, because the Polish-Lithuanian army had to first cross the Dnieper, before
they could continue towards Smolensk. Indeed, on September 6, 1514, Hetman Ostrogski
arrived near Orsha. There he halted his army to reconnoitre the
terrain and prepare his army for the crossing. Although the army of the Grand Duchy of Moscow
was larger, Ivan Chelyadnin wanted to avoid a risky encounter. Instead, he patiently waited and observed
the enemy, planning to attack while they were still developing their battle formations. Chelyadnin's army was predominantly composed
of cavalry, but its’ size is difficult to estimate. Some sources claim that it numbered as many
as 80,000 men. While the Muscovites definitely had a numerical
advantage, the actual size of their army was much smaller, with the range between 40,000
and 60,000 troops being more likely. The Muscovites waited for two days for the
Polish-Lithuanian army to make the first move. But what they failed to realise was that only
a portion of the enemy army was present. Ostrogski anticipated that Chelyadnin would
contest the crossing, so he spread out smaller units of Lithuanian cavalry across a wide
area and had ordered the men to set up additional tents, light numerous camp fires, and make
a lot of noise, to create the illusion that the entire Polish-Lithuanian army was at Orsha. The ruse worked. While the Muscovites expected to contest the
crossing at Orsha, some 5 kilometres (just over 3 miles) northeast, Ostrogski had two
pontoon bridges constructed and moved the majority of his army across the river, during
the night. When Chelyadnin finally learned of the movements,
he rushed towards Pashino, but by then the Polish-Lithuanian army had already crossed. Ostrogski forces found themselves on a plain
cut by a ravine with the river behind them. Not far in front of them, a more numerous
army of Muscovites took up position. Both sides realized that a pitched battle
was upon them. Muscovites were composed of five large cavalry
regiments. The most numerous was under the command of
Chelyadnin, in the center. In front of it was a smaller vanguard contingent. Stationed on each side were cavalry regiments. The reserves were positioned in the rear. The Muscovite army numbered between 40,000
and 60,000 troops. The Polish-Lithuanian Army formed in its classic
formation, The Old Polish Order. On the right, Sampoliński commanded the first
Polish line, comprised mostly of better equipped and heavy cavalry, while Świerczowski led
the second and third. On the left, Ostrogski took charge of the
Lithuanians in the front, with the second and third line commanded by Jerzy Radziwiłł. All told, some 30,000 Polish-Lithuanian troops
took to the field. Around 2 PM, Ivan Chelyadnin ordered his army
to attack. The Muscovite plan was to use the terrain,
especially the ravines and various bushes, in order to surprise the enemy, but their
movements were spotted in time. The Muscovite vanguard took part in this attack, as well as
the right wing under the command of Mikhail Golitsa. As the Russian vanguard was spotted, it was attacked by
Lithuanian auxiliary troops with a hail of arrows. Muscovites responded with arrows volleys of
their own and a fierce battle began between Lithuanian and Russian archers. In the meantime, Ostrogski saw that the biggest
threat to his army was the Russian right wing, which tried to sneak up and attack the Lithuanian
left flank. In order to eliminate this danger, he could
rush towards the enemy and stop him; BUT since he mostly had light cavalry under his command,
it was questionable whether they would be able to stop the more numerous Muscovite right
wing. His lightly armoured cavalry would be especially
exposed to enemy’s arrows, and in case of a defeat on the left wing, he could lose control
over the pontoon bridges he had built earlier, which would lead to a catastrophic situation. Because of this, he ordered Sampoliński to
attack these enemy units so that instead of the light Lithuanian, the enemy would face
the heavy Polish cavalry. The Polish horsemen rode straight through
the arrow volleys exchanged by the Lithuanian auxiliaries and the Russian vanguard, and
having suffered minimal losses they crashed into Mikhail Golitsa's flank. The momentum of the Polish charge caused chaos
in the Russian ranks, leading to panic and confusion. Responding quickly, Chelyadnin ordered his
left wing forward. Wanting to break the enemy line, he focused
the attack was the now weakened Polish right wing. Outnumbered 3:1 on this part of the front,
the Polish hussars and light cavalry managed to hold off the more numerous opponent with
fierce charges, followed by quick retreats. However, Chelyadnin still hadn’t committed
his center. He watched the fight on the wings and sent
reinforcements when needed. Thus, seeing the difficult situation on his
right wing, he sent parts of his vanguard to their aid, aiming to attack the Polish
heavy cavalry from the rear. The Muscovite commander waited for the moment
when the enemy forces would get stretched thin, before launching an overwhelming attack
on the Polish-Lithuanian center. His main goal was to capture the bridge and
prevent Ostrogski from retreating across the river. The Polish heavy cavalry, although initially
successful in inflicting heavy losses on the enemy, now found themselves pressed from two
sides. Step by step their attack waned until they
finally went on the defensive. In the meantime, Ostrogski rushed with his
units to help the embattled Polish heavy cavalry, which was in a difficult situation. On the left wing, the Muscovites managed to
suppress the outnumbered Polish right. The Poles gradually retreated and it seemed
that it was only a matter of time before they would break and retreat towards the bridge
en masse. Chelyadnin’s plan succeeded. Ostrogski overstretched his lines, sending
many of his troops to bolster the wings. Now, the Muscovite commander ordered the center
forward. They advanced steadily towards the fairly
weakened Polish center. But, personally leading from the front, Hetman
Ostrogski raised the morale of the men and pushed back on the left. Mikhail Golitsa's units began a slow retreat
towards the Dnieper River, suffering heavy losses. At the same time on the right, the Polish
infantry, equipped with guns and pikes, arrived at their positions. They attacked the flank of the Muscovite left
wing from the forest, while the Polish cavalry, after a successfully performed feigned retreat,
started a counterattack. Surprised by close infantry and artillery
fire and the renewed hussar attack, Chelyadnin's left wing suffered terribly. A Many Muscovite officers fell, and panic
spread throughout the entire left wing. In the meantime, the Muscovite center finally
collided with the weakened Polish-Lithuanian center. However, the battles on the wings were by
now already decided. Ostrogski rallied his Lithuanians and now
charged into the center while leaving Sampoliński and his heavy Polish cavalry to chase the
Russian right wing. Around this time, the Muscovite left wing
fled the field, followed by the Polish right. But the bloodiest phase of the battle began
when the last reserves of Poles and Lithuanians joined in the attack on Chelyadnin's center
and rearguard. The Muscovites put up a stiff resistance,
but after a long fight and immense casualties, they eventually broke and fled. The pursuit lasted until sunset. Russian losses were enormous, with at least 13,000 perishing
during the battle and another 5,000 captured. On the other hand, the Poles reported only
500 dead, a quite unrealistic claim. Given the ferocity of the fighting, it is
likely that the losses went into the thousands. Nevertheless, the Polish-Lithuanian army inflicted
a crushing defeat on the Muscovites at Orsha. After the battle, the Polish-Lithuanian Army managed
to regain control over some of their lost fortresses. However, the well-fortified and well-supplied
Smolensk required a months-long siege. Grand Duke Vasili III could not allow this
important fortress to fall into enemy hands again, and he did everything necessary to
keep it. Despite failing to recapture Smolensk, news
of the Polish-Lithuanian victory in the Battle of Orsha spread across Europe. After defeating the Grand Duchy of Moscow,
the Holy Roman Empire and other states decided to moderate their policy towards the Kingdom
of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. However, the wars in the east continued. Vasili tried to avoid an open battle for some
time, but already in 1518 a new army was raised and the offensive was renewed to conquer another
strategic Lithuanian fortress… Polotsk.|||The slogan is resounding today Hey, to arms insurgents! The Prussian wants to strip your banners Victims are falling Hey to arms! The Prussian wants to strip your banners Victims are falling Hey to arms Chain of heroes From the chest is built Defends Przemysław's land Glory and praise to the insurgents Hey to arms! Defends Przemysław's land Glory and praise to the insurgents Hey to arms! Rounds are flying Bayonets are snapping Hey companions to the barricades March insurgents-heroes Hey to arms! Hey companions to the barricades March insurgents-heroes Hey to arms! The fire burns the German Grenades are bursting   Greater-Poland's fate's at stake So everyone on guard Hey to arms! Greater-Poland's fate's at stake So everyone on guard Hey to arms! A bloody battle is going on The enemy has already surrendered Greater-Poland from its darkness Free from the dead awakens Hey to arms! Greater-Poland from its darkness Free from the dead awakens Hey to arms! Brave Poznań's citizens Showed the world How to chase the Prussian Barefoot to Heimat Hey to arms! How to chase the Prussian Barefoot to Heimat Hey to arms! On the hundredth anniversary of the Greater-Poland Uprising 1918/2018|||what's up you guys and welcome back to the channel 
today we made our way out of krakow to Wieliczka   because we were told that there is a stop here 
that you cannot miss if you ever visit krakow   the Wieliczka salt mines so let's go on a 
tour and explore this beautiful area together   so that you can hear me well my name is Alexandra 
I'll be your guide today ladies and gentlemen I hope that you're all wearing comfortable shoes 
as we're having three kilometers of walking ahead   of us and more or less 800 steps we will stay 
with 320 to get to the first level of the mine   then 450 more ahead of us the temperature 
inside is around 17 degrees celsius so it will   be very pleasant downstairs are you sure you're 
ready yes perfect we are making our way into   the mine now and the lady said that it's more 
than 300 steps just to get down and then within   the mine itself we're going to walk around three 
kilometers so definitely make sure to bring your   comfort shoes comfortable shoes the comfort shoes 
as Naomi was saying 300 steps around 64 meters   down and I definitely didn't bring my 
comfortable shoes i'm wearing a pair of Docs   so we'll see if I get through this um well you 
can already feel the air getting a little bit   on the colder side but it's supposed to be pretty 
pleasant down there around 16 degrees celsius so   we'll see please pray with me I hope we don't 
have to walk these stairs back up walking up   more than 300 stairs or steps would probably 
be exhausting so we're a few minutes in now   and it really does feel like it's not 
stopping just down another floor 36   meters down already and we have about another 
30 to go you can already start seeing the salt   all over the walls and I kind of are you one of 
these people as well that just kind of want to   touch everything you see so yes definitely not 
a place for anybody that's over six feet tall   and gotta keep a low profile here guys it's 
interesting they have ventilation rooms here just   to keep the temperature at an average base of 17 
degrees year round so and we just went through one   so very very interesting beautiful place the 
20th century but here you can see Daniłowiszka Shaft which was build in the 17th century 
and actually until the very beginning of   actually the very end of 2021 we were using this 
shaft to enter the mine in total there were 26   mainshafts like Daniłowiszka Shaft, which were connecting deeper 
sections of the mine with the surface and 184   shafts connecting different levels of the mine in 
a moment I'll show you one of them called Antonia   wow so we were just in a vault there and the floor 
itself even was made of salt and there was an   incredible salt sculpture in there too 40 million 
tourists have visited the salt mine to date   as well mind-blowing as I have already mentioned 
we are now on the first level of the mine 64   meters below the surface but the maximum debt that 
we are going to reach today is do you remember 120   135 ladies and gentlemen as you have already 
noticed there is plenty of wood here we can   see that our mine is actually a combination of 
wood and salt and actually all of these wooden   constructions they are all made of coniferous wood 
because this type of wood becomes as tough as rock   under the influence of salt and it fits perfectly 
in the mine to secure our constructions the air   down here because of its properties and being so 
rich in salt is supposed to be really really good   if you have asthma or allergies so I have both 
of them that's absolutely perfect for me but it   is certainly a different type of air being down 
this low on the ground certainly hits different   the air is very very different you feel a little 
bit dizzy and ceiling's here pretty low as well   so I'm gonna have a sore back so apparently 
a massive flood took place in the early 90's   and not only did it float the entire mine it also 
floated the entire town of Wieliczka wow the tour   guide just said there that you can actually fit 
the entire eiffel tower into this mine and still   have three meters to spare that image is a bit 
bizarre but definitely super interesting very   interesting to mention is that the miners had 
to participate in a mass twice a day once in the   morning and once in the afternoon and if they 
didn't participate for example in the morning   that meant really bad luck and also they were 
not allowed to actually enter the mine that day   so if you had a bad morning and slept in maybe 
didn't get out of bed because of too much vodka   the night before and that meant no work for you 
that day we are now entering saint kingas chapel   which was built by three miners two brothers 
and another one that finished it afterwards   and every single sunday there's still mass 
happening here at 7 30 a.m and you can even rent   this place in case you would like to get married 
here and she said it costs between three to four   thousand euro just to rent this place here 
for your wedding ceremony but oh my god   that would be such a beautiful wedding 
and I would love to get married here   down here in the chapel this place really is 
absolutely mind-blowing I just cannot believe   the stuff that I'm looking at right now the 
sculptures on the walls the beautiful chandeliers   everything even the floor is made of salt it's 
just out of this world it's so unique and unesco   world heritage site as well so it really really 
really just blows your mind just walking around   here and it's around 100 meters deep right now as 
well so my legs are feeling very very wobbly and I don't really know if I'm gonna make it all the way 
no jokes will be fine but this place is stunning   what I personally think is so absolutely stunning 
about this chapel here is that it was built with   several different types of salt so the gray salt 
that you can see everywhere on the floors and the   walls that is the local salt here but in order to 
set some accents they actually imported salt from   other mines just to kind of give it this like 
glowing type of image and we actually saw   one statue of baby jesus where everything around 
it is kind of in the gray salt and then baby jesus   itself is or himself is in a pinky type of salt 
or for example that some accents were set with   a white salt and where you know the heart is kind 
of illuminated off the saint and that's absolutely   beautiful that was really really stunning 
beautiful underground lake over 100 meters   down and it's apparently impossible to drown in 
because of the salt content in there and it's   apparently freezing cold as well so won't be gone 
for a swim incredible so apparently even up to   this day there's around 200 miners that are still 
working in these salt mines around 500 tour guides   in all different types of languages and they 
apparently host up to 10 000 visitors a day wow the last chamber of our tour here is 36 meters 
high and it's called the Stanisłav Staszic   chamber I hope I pronounced that one right 
it's actually a chamber where a lot of events   are happening such as bungee jumping because 
it's quite high I hope you can see it up there   and somebody flew an air balloon in here which 
was the first underground air balloon journey   and we're just absolutely mad I would love to 
definitely be part of one of these events one day okay so first things first I would like to thank 
our tour guide Alexandra she did an amazing tour   and she's just cute as a button so if you 
ever come here and get Alexandra you can be   lucky yeah she was an amazing tour guide yeah tour 
itself was absolutely fantastic we enjoyed every   single second of it and seeing just how far down 
those mines go it really really blew our minds   just understanding the pure size of it she said 
at one point we were around 130 meters down and   she said we've only seen around one percent of the 
mine itself and that we would take probably around   one month in total to see the entire mine so it 
gives you an idea of the scale of that place so   the entire mine is approximately 230 kilometers 
long like underground from what I understood   and we maybe saw like three kilometers 
today or something like that so   there's a lot a lot more to see and but I do think 
the majority of it is not open to the public yeah   absolutely and we are now just taking some time 
to decompress the town that these mines are in   is absolutely stunning as well the Wieliczka salt 
mines 100% worth going to we've been told that if   you come to krakow you cannot come here and miss 
out on these mines and we 100% after seeing those   we agree well well worth a visit and definitely 
come here and check them out as soon as you can   I couldn't agree more but that's it from us today 
you guys we are the two mad explorers and this   is your reminder to keep exploring thanks for 
watching see you in the next video guys bye-bye|||>>> AS MASS ATROCITIES ARE >>> AS MASS ATROCITIES ARE REPORTED IN UKRAINE, THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE MARCHED YESTERDAY AT
THE FORMER SITE OF ANOTHER ACT THE FORMER SITE OF ANOTHER ACT OF BARBARICS. THERE WAS A GATHERING AT WHAT WAS ONCE A HOLOCAUST CAMP. HE DENOUNCED RUSSIA'S WAR ON UKRAINE, AND HE SAID, QUOTE, WE ARE HERE TO SHOW THAT EVERY NATION HAS A SACRED RIGHT TO LIFE. >> AND SINCE RUSHY'S INVASION, POLAND HAS OPENED ITS BORDERS UP TO UKRAINIAN REFUGEES. DR. DAVE CAMPBELL TALKED ABOUT THE HUMANITARIAN CRISIS AND ALL THE EFFORTS TO HELP. >> WITH MILLIONS OF REFUGEES CROSSING THE BORDER INTO POLAND, U.S. AMBASSADOR, MARK BRZEZINSKI, ONLY APPOINTED THIS PAST DECEMBER IS NOW AT THE CENTER OF THE WORST HUMANITARIAN CRISIS IN THE PAST FEW DECADES. >> IN THE LAST TEN WEEKS WE HAVE HAD ALMOST 100 MEMBERS OF CONGRESS AND WE HAVE HAD THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES AND VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES AND SECRETARY OF STATE TWICE AND SECRETARY OF DEFENSE TWICE, AND THIS CRISIS IS NOT JUST A POLISH PROBLEM, IT'S AN INTERNATIONAL PROBLEM AND IT'S IMPORTANT FOR THE AMERICANS TO JOIN IN AND SHARE IN SOLVING THIS PROBLEM AND FOR THE REST OF THE WORLD TO DO SO AS WELL. >> NOT ONLY HAS MARK MET WITH GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS BUT WITH PRIVATE SECTOR COMPANIES TO CONTRIBUTE TO AID LIKE UBER. >> THEY WERE THE FIRST COMPANY THROUGH THE DOOR WHEN THE CRISIS BROKE OUT ON FEBRUARY 24th, AND THEY SAID WE ARE SEEING THE PEOPLE COMING TO THE BORDER, AND HOW CAN UBER JUMP IN BY MAKING FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTIONS AND PROVIDING RIDES, AND THEY HAVE SAVED THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE. >> AMBASSADOR BRZEZINSKI AND I SPOKE ABOUT THE RESOURCES AFTER THE LONG JOURNEY OF THE DISPLACED UKRAINIANS. >> THEY HAVE BEEN ON THEIR WAY FOR THREE TO FOUR DAYS. MANY OF THEM DID NOT HAVE PROPER FOOD, AND SOME OF THEM ARE COMING WITH TWO BAGS, THAT'S ALL THEY COULD TAKE, AND THEY HAVE TO LAY ON THE FLOOR OF THE CARRIAGE BECAUSE OF THE SHELLING. >> HOW DO YOU TAKE CARE OF THEIR NEEDS WHEN THE REFUGEES ARRIVE HERE? >> WE ARE LOOKING AT BASIC HEALTH CARE. PEOPLE HAVE BEEN ON THE ROAD FOR THE LAST FEW DAYS, AND PEOPLE WHO ARE SICK, THEY SELDOM CAN -- WE ARE LOOKING AT A LOT OF MEDICAL EVACUATIONS FROM A CITY IN UKRAINE. >> THIS BOY IS A REFUGEE AND IS VOLUNTEERING FOR HIS FELLOW UKRAINIANS. >> I HAVE UKRAINIANS WHO ALSO MANAGED TO MOVE TO POLAND FROM UKRAINE BECAUSE OF WAR. >> DID YOU LEAVE SOME FAMILY BEHIND WHEN YOU CAME HERE? >> YEAH, MY FAMILY IN UKRAINE
NOW. >> JOANNA FROM THE NORWEGIAN COUNCIL IS ASSISTING MILLIONS OF UKRAINIANS. >> WE NEED TO REMEMBER FUNDING IS DRYING UP AND IT'S IMPORTANT TO REPLENISH IT, AND THERE ARE MASSIVE CONCERNS THAT WITH THE NEW WAVE OF DISPLACEMENT, THE PEOPLE ARRIVING ARE GOING TO BE MORE VULNERABLE AND IT'S SHOCKING AND EMOTIONALLY CHALLENGING TO BE HERE IN MY OWN COUNTRY HELPING PEOPLE FLEE FROM
WAR, JUST LIKE MY GRANDPARENTS WAR, JUST LIKE MY GRANDPARENTS WERE FLEEING WAR. >> EIGHT DECADES LATER NEXT DOOR TO WE'RE WITNESSING THE HORRORS OF UNJUST BRUTALITY AND AGAINST INNOCENT PEOPLE WHO WANT TO LIVE PEACEFULLY. IN 2022, THE ENTIRE WORLD SEES THE SUFFERING OF MILLIONS OF UKRAINIANS, BUT WE ALL ALSO ALL OF POLAND CHOOSING ACTION. >> TODAY WHEN THE SOCIETY AND THE GOVERNMENT, THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ARE HELPING MILLIONS OF UKRAINIANS WHO COME TO POLAND, I THINK THAT THERE IS A CERTAIN SILVER LINING TO THAT CLOUD, BECAUSE MAYBE SOME PEOPLE ARE ACTUALLY DRAWING LESSONS FROM THE PAST. >> AMBASSADOR BRZEZINSKI VISITING TWO SUCH ORGANIZATIONS TAKING ACTION. THE SLK FOUNDATION AND LITTLE CHEF WHO PARTNERED TO COOK FOOD FOR REFUGEES. >> SO EVERY TWO WEEKS WE HAVE REFUGEES REFUGEES COOKING FOR REFUGEES. AS OF THE SECOND DAY OF THE WAR, WE'VE BEEN COOKING AND HELPING DISTRIBUTE FOOD. >> HOW ARE YOU SUPPORTED? >> WE ARE TAKING DONATIONS BECAUSE OUR GOAL IS IT WORK LONG-TERM. THIS IS A SITUATION THAT WILL NOT GO AWAY. AND IT IS NOT A SPRINT. IT IS A MARATHON. >> THE POLISH PEOPLE ARE STEPPING UP FOR PEOPLE LIKE UKRAINE IN PLACES LIKE THIS, IN KITCHENS, IN APARTMENT BUILDINGS AND BIG CITIES AND LITTLE TOWNS, THEY'RE INVITING UKRAINIANS INTO THEIR HOMES AND IT IS A NATIONAL POLICY TO BRING THEM INTO POLISH HOMES. REALLY VERY GOOD. >> CAN DISPLACED UKRAINIANS NOW MAKING UP 10% OF POLAND'S POPULATION, THE FUNDING OF NGO'S IS CRUCIAL TO SUSTAINING REFUGEE SUPPORT IN THE COUNTRY. >> WE DON'T WANT POLAND TO BECOME DESTABILIZED BY THIS CRISIS. AND TRAGICALLY I THINK PUTIN KNOWS THAT IT IS NOT JUST THROUGH MISSILES, BEING THROWN AT A COUNTRY THAT COULD DESTABILIZE A COUNTRY. HE COULD PUSH PEOPLE INTO A COUNTRY AS WELL TO DESTABILIZE IT. WHAT WE'RE SEEING IN POLAND IS TREMENDOUS STABILITY. THIS FOR POLAND IS 1939 AGAIN. THE POLs ARE LOOKING FOR THE REST OF THE WORLD FOR HELP AND TO UNDERSTAND THAT THIS IS NOT JUST A POLISH PROBLEM, THIS IS AN INTERNATIONAL PROBLEM AND IT IS IMPORTANT FOR THE AMERICANS|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||SATISFIED WITH THE PRESENTATION THAT THEY HAVE BEEN ABLE TO MAKE TO THE AMERICAN PEOPLE. >> ALL RIGHT. GARRETT HAAKE, THANK YOU SO MUCH. GREATLY APPRECIATE IT. >>> PRESIDENT BIDEN LEAVES ON SATURDAY TO GERMANY FOR MEETING OF THE G7 FOLLOWED BY THE NATO SUMMIT IN SPAIN. ONE OF THE GOALS WILL BE TO KEEP ALLIES COMMITTED TO SUPPORTING UKRAINIANS THROUGH WHAT COULD BE A MONTHS' LONG WAR. WITH US NOW, U.S. AMBASSADOR TO POLAND, MARK BRZEZINSKI, AND ALSO U.S. AMBASSADOR TO UKRAINE BRIDGET BRINK. THANK YOU SO MUCH. AMBASSADOR BRINK, SO GREAT TO HAVE YOU HERE WITH US. I'M CURIOUS HOW ARE THINGS GOING RIGHT NOW WITH YOU GETTING SET UP AGAIN IN UKRAINE AND MORE TO THE POINT, WE'VE BEEN DISCUSSING WHETHER THE EUROPEANS ARE STAYING FOCUSED ON THIS, WHETHER THE EU IS STAYING FOCUSED ON THIS, GERMANY AND FRANCE SPECIFICALLY. WHAT IS YOUR OPINION ON HOW OUR ALLIES ARE DOING IN THE FIGHT AGAINST PUTIN? >> WELL, THANKS SO MUCH, JOE, FOR HAVING ME AND, MIKA, I REALLY APPRECIATE IT. MAYBE I JUST COULD TALK A SECOND ABOUT THE FIGHT. AFTER SUCCESSFULLY PUSHING RUSSIA AWAY FROM KYIV, THE FIGHT IS NOW VERY FOCUSED IN THE EAST IN THE AREA CALLED DONBAS AND IT
IS A REALLY TOUGH FIGHT, STREET IS A REALLY TOUGH FIGHT, STREET BY I CANKILOMETER BY KILOMETER. SO WHILE TREMENDOUS EUPHORIA INI COMING DOWN TO A DIFFICULT FIGHT. AND I'M BACK HERE IN WASHINGTON TO HAVE SENIOR LEVEL CONSULTATIONS AND REINFORCE SECRETARY AUSTIN AND HIS PUSH WITH MEMBERS OF THE CONTACT GROUP, 40 COUNTRIES WORKING TOGETHER TO PROVIDE SECURITY ASSISTANCE TO PUSH EVEN HARDER AND TO MOVE EVEN FASTER TO MOVE ASSISTANCE TO UKRAINE. THE EUROPEANS ARE STANDING WITH US, IT IS REALLY IMPORTANT THAT WE STAY TOGETHER ON THE ASSISTANCE, ON THE SECURITY ASSISTANCE, ON THE HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE, ON THE ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE AND ALSO ON THE SANCTIONS. AND SO FAR WE HAVE A VERY, VERY STRONG ALLIANCE AND I'M REALLY PROUD OF THAT AND I'M WORKING ALSO TO KEEP IT TOGETHER. >> PRESIDENT ZELENSKYY HAS SUGGESTED THAT GERMANY AND FRANCE IN PARTICULAR ARE TALKING MORE THAN DELIVERING MILITARY ITEMS. WHAT CAN YOU TELL US? >> I THINK WE'RE ALL WORKING TO -- I MEAN, WE'RE HERE -- I'M IN KYIV NOW WITH HIGH SMALL EMBASSY TEAM AND WE'RE WORKING TOPRE-VENT WIDER WAR, BUT DOING THAT BY HELPING THE UKRAINIANS NEED WHEN THE TIME COMES FROM A POSITION OF STRENGTH. SO OUR GOAL IS TO HELP UKRAINE DEFEND ITSELF AND IS THAT THE GOAL THAT WE SHARE WITH OUR FRIENDS, PARTNERS AN ALLIES AND THAT IS WHAT WE'LL KEEP DOING UNTIL THE TIME COMES WHEN NEGOTIATIONS AREWILL BE POSSIBLE >> PRESIDENT ZELENSKYY HAS OBVIOUSLY BEEN VERY DIRECT ON WHAT HE NEEDS, WHAT HIS COUNTRY NEEDS, WHAT HIS MILITARY NEEDS FROM THE WEST. THERE HAS BEEN CRITICISM OF SEVERAL GOVERNMENTS. I'M CURIOUS, WHAT DOES HIS GOVERNMENT TELL YOU THE UKRAINIANS NEED FROM THE UNITED STATES AND THE EU AND NATO? >> FIRST THING THAT I HEAR FROM PRESIDENT ZELENSKYY BUT ALSO FROM EVERY OTHER UKRAINIAN IN GOVERNMENT AND OUTSIDE OF GOVERNMENT ON THE STREET IS THANK YOU. THANK YOU TO THE UNITED STATES AND THANK YOU TO EVERYBODY WHO HAS HELPED THEM ACHIEVE THE SUCCESS THAT THEY HAVE ACHIEVED SO FAR. AND IT IS ALSO DUE TO THEIR INCREDIBLE COURAGE AND BRAVERY IN THIS FIGHT. SO OF COURSE THEY ARE TALKING TO US SPECIFICALLY ABOUT WHAT THEY NEED AND WE ARE TALKING REGULARLY, MORE THAN DAILY, BASICALLY I'D SAY HOURLY WITH ME, WITH OTHER MEMBERS OF OUR GOVERNMENT, AND TO WHAT WE ARE DOING IS TO TRY TO MAKE SURE WE'RE GIVING THEM WHAT THEY NEED TO SUCCEED IN THIS FIGHT AND TO DEFEND THEMSELVES. >> AMBASSADOR BRZEZINSKI, MARK, RUSSIA'S INVASION OF UKRAINE IS LEADING TO DRAMATIC SHIFT IN OPINIONS ABOUT MOSCOW IN NEIGHBORING POLAND, NEW PEW RESEARCH CENTER POLL RELEASED YESTERDAY FOUND THAT 94% OF POLES SEE RUSSIA AS A MAJOR THREAT WHILE AN EQUAL PERCENT OF PEOPLE SAY THAT THEY HAVE NO CONFIDENCE AT ALL IN VLADIMIR PUTIN. THE STUDY ALSO FOUND A MAJORITY OF POLES HAVE A FAVORABLE OPINION OF UNITED STATES AND 60% SAY THAT THEY HAVE CONFIDENT IN PRESIDENT BIDEN. IT REALLY IS REMARKABLE, MARK,
WHAT HAS HAPPENED IN POLAND OVER WHAT HAS HAPPENED IN POLAND OVER THE PAST SEVERAL YEARS. UNITED STATES POLICYMAKERS HAD ISSUES WITH POLAND. POLES HAD ISSUES WITH THE UNITED STATES. BUT IN THIS SAME PEW POLL, IT SHOWS THAT 90% OF POLES, ABOUT 90% OF POLES HAVE A POSITIVE IMPRESSION OF THE UNITED STATES. THAT IS REALLY NOTHING SHORT OF EXTRAORDINARY. AND I TALKED ABOUT GERMANY AND FRANCE. IT SEEMS THE UNITED STATES AND POLAND ARE THE TWO COUNTRIES WHO ARE STEPPING UP AND IN FRONT OF THE LINE TO HELP THE UKRAINIANS. >> JOE, THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME THIS MORNING. I'M SO PLEASED TO JOIN MY COLLEAGUE AMBASSADOR BRIDGET BRINK WHO IS IN KYIV. I THINK THAT IS FANTASTIC LEADERSHIP THAT SHE STARTED DAY ONE IN KYIV. JOE, YOU'RE RIGHT, THE UNITED STATES AND POLAND ARE DELIVERING FOR THE UKRAINIANS LIKE NONE OVER AND THAT IS NOT JUST TALK. IN TERMS OF THE VALUE OF THE MUNITIONS, IN TERMS OF THE VALVE THE LETHAL AND NONLETHAL AID, IT IS THE POLES AND THE AMERICANS WHO HAVE REALLY STEPPED UP. BUT WHAT IS AMAZING TO SEE, JOE, IS HOW THIS CRISIS HAS LED TO A BIG PUBLIC APPROVAL UPTICK IN ALL OF POLAND FOR AN EMBRACE OF THE RELATIONSHIP WITH THE UNITED STATES AND OF AN EMBRACE OF PRESIDENT BIDEN'S LEADERSHIP. LAST TIME THAT PEW PUBLIC OPINION POLL WAS TAKEN, THERE WAS ABOUT 50% PUBLIC APPROVAL RATING IN POLAND FOR THE RELATIONSHIP WITH THE UNITED STATES AND NOW IT IS 90% AND EVEN MORE AMAZING, POLAND HAS TAKEN IN MORE THAN 4 MILLION UKRAINIAN REFUGEES. THE PEW PUBLIC OPINION POLL SHOWS THAT POLISH PUBLIC OPINION IN SUPPORT OF TAKING IN EVEN MORE REFUGEES IS INCREASING AND IS WELL OVER 80%. SO AS THEY HAVE TAKEN IN AND PUT INTO POLISH HOMES AND APARTMENTS, MILLIONS OF UKRAINIANS, THE PUBLIC SUPPORT FOR TAKING IN MORE REFUGEES IS INCREASING. AN INCREDIBLE STORY AND I THINK THAT IT REALLY REFLECTS CONFIDENCE IN WHAT PRESIDENT BIDEN IS DOING IN DEVELOPING CONSENSUS AMONG ALLIES IN SUPPORT OF ZELENSKYY AND THE UKRAINIAN FIGHTERS. >> AND I'VE TALKED ABOUT IT ON THE SHOW BEFORE, MY DAUGHTER WAS ABLE TO SPEND THE LAST MONTH IN POLAND LOOKING AT WHAT THE POLES WERE DOING AS FAR AS HUMANITARIAN RELIEF, LOOKING AT HOW THEY WERE TAKING UKRAINIANS INTO THEIR HOMES AND ALSO SAYING THAT WHEREVER SHE WENT, SHE SAW THE UNITED STATES, THE HAND OF THE UNITED STATES, SUPPORT OF THE UNITED STATES. AND HELPING THOSE UKRAINIAN REFUGEES ALONG WITH THE POLES. SAID THAT IT WAS REALLY AWE-INSPIRING. AND IT IS, IT IS REMARKABLE WHAT THE POLISH PEOPLE HAVE DONE DURING THIS CRISIS. >> AND WE'VE TALKED ABOUT IT, AMBASSADOR. IT IS GREAT TO SEE YOU. THROUGH ALL THE DARKNESS WE'VE SEEN IN UKRAINE, THE LIGHT THAT THE PEOPLE OF POLAND HAVE SHED IS EXTRAORDINARY FOR THE WORLD TO SEE. YOU TALK ABOUT 4 MILLION REFUGEES. THE POLES OPENING THEIR HOMES AND APARTMENTS TO COMPLETE STRANGERS. WHAT HAS IT BEEN LIKE FOR POLAND TO ABSORB THAT MANY PEOPLE AND POTENTIALLY MANY MORE HERE IN TERMS OF SCHOOLS AND JOBS AND EVERYTHING ELSE THAT COMES WITH THAT? BECAUSE IT IS MORE THAN JUST OPENING THE DOOR TO YOUR APARTMENT. YOU ARE ABSORBING ALL THOSE PEOPLE IN YOUR SOCIETY. HOW IS THAT GOING? >> SURE. WELL, WILLIE, NEVER IN THE FUTURE WILL THERE BE A MASS MOVEMENT OF REFUGEES FROM ONE COUNTRY THAT DOES NOT THOUSAND INVOKE- NOW INVOKE THE HELP OF POLAND. NEVER BEFORE HAS THERE BEEN A NATIONAL LEADERSHIP THAT EVERY SINGLE ARRIVING REFUGEE WILL BE PLACED IN SOMEONE'S HOME OR APARTMENT. IMAGINE IN OUR PRIVATE SAID WE HAVE 5 MILLION PEOPLE FROM GUATEMALA COMING ACROSS THE TEXAS BORDER AND WE HAVE THE PLACEMENT OF EVERY ONE OF THOSE REFUGEES IN TO SOMEONE'S HOME. IT WOULD BE A BIG DIFFERENCE IN
APPROACH THAT HAS BEEN TAKEN AND APPROACH THAT HAS BEEN TAKEN AND THAT IS WHAT THE POLES HAVE DONE EVERY ARRIVING UKRAINIAN REFUGEE IS GIVEN EVERY RIGHT THE POLISH CITIZEN HAS EXCEPT THE RIGHT TO VOTE. SO THEY ARE GIVEN THE SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER, THE RIGHT TO SEND CHILDREN TO SCHOOLS, THE RIGHT TO PURSUE WORK. AND IN THE HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF NEW JOBS THAT HAVE BEEN CREATED IN POLAND IN THE TECH SECTORS, ALSO IN THE HOME CARE SECTORS, IN INDUSTRIAL SECTOR FOR JOBS FOR UKRAINIANS. SO IT IS WORKING. BUT THERE ARE LOGISTICAL LOGJAMS COMING DOWN THE PIKE. THE FOUR LARGEST CITIES IN POLAND ARE AT CAPACITY. AND AS THE GOVERNMENT TRIES TO DIRECT SOME OF THE NEWLY ARRIVING REFUGEES TO THE COUNTRYSIDE, THE REFUGEES DON'T WANT TO GO TO THE COUNTRYSIDE, THEY WANT TO GO TO THE CITIES. SO THERE ARE SOME LOGISTICAL TENSIONS. AND WE'LL SEE ON THE FIRST DAY OF SCHOOL SEPTEMBER 1 IN POLAND HOW -- WHETHER WE CAN HAVE ALL THE UKRAINIAN STUDENTS, UKRAINIAN CHILDREN, IN POLAND SITTING IN CLASSROOMS. THAT IS THE GOAL. BUT THERE IS A NATIONAL INSPIRED EFFORT TO DO THAT. >> EXTRAORDINARY AND HISTORIC. AMBASSADOR BRINK, BACK TO YOUR SIDE OF THE BORDER WHERE YOU ARE DOING YOUR WORK, I'M CURIOUS HOW YOU ARE LOOKING AT THIS WAR IN TERMS OF A TIME HORIZON. I MEAN, THE SUPPORT OF THE WORLD IS STILL THERE. OTHER NEWS AND LIFE INTERVENE AND IT GOES INTO THE BACK GROUND A BIT. BUT THE WAR PERSISTS. VLADIMIR PUTIN PERSISTS IN THE EAST. HOW DO YOU SEE THIS ENDING? IS THERE SOME KIND OF A NEGOTIATION, CAN THERE BE A NEGOTIATION WITH SOMEONE LIKE VLADIMIR PUTIN WHO HAS EARNED NO TRUST WHATSOEVER FROM UKRAINIANS OR ANYONE ELSE FOR THAT MATTER? WHERE AND HOW DOES THIS END ULTIMATELY? >> I JUST WANT TO REEMFORCE WHAT AMBASSADOR BRZEZINSKI SAID AS WELL. THERE ARE 7 MILLION IDPs IN UKRAINE AND 5 MILLION OUTSIDE OF UKRAINE. AND 3 MILLION WHICH POLAND HOSTS. SO THIS IS AN ENORMOUS CRISIS AND MANY DIMENSIONS. AND I CAN'T HAVE A BETTER PARTNER WITH AMBASSADOR BRZEZINSKI IN THE NEXT DOOR COUNTRY, SO I REALLY APPRECIATE HIM AND EVERYTHING THAT HE IS DOING AND EVERYTHING THAT THE POLES ARE DOING. TO YOUR QUESTION ABOUT HOW DOES IT END, WE SUPPORT A SOVEREIGN INDEPENDENT PROSPEROUS AND DEMOCRATIC UKRAINE. WE HAVE SAID THAT WE SUPPORT PRESIDENT ZELENSKYY AND HIS GOVERNMENT. SO WHEN AND HOW HE DECIDES TO NEGOTIATE THE END OF THE WAR, ALL WARS DO HE SAID IN NEGOTIATION EVENTUALLY, AND WHAT WE ARE DOING NOW IS PROVIDING|||Hello everybody to my number three out of
my top five that I had selected for Eurovision top five this year 2023 in Liverpool in England,
the artist is called, Jann. I used to live not far from Liverpool but
just in Manchester not far from Manchester in Chester not far in Chester on the main
road going into Chester going into Manchester therefore leading to Liverpool so there you
go a bit of geography for you let's get to John the Gladiator that didn't Poland did
not receive the judge's votes the judges were thinking with a certain part of their anatomy
and they certainly haven't got this because they wouldn't have picked the blonde representative
that looks like an Instagram sad person and that's my personal view by the way I think
the song that's representing Poland is shameful weak the artists can't sing live and for legal
reasons I won't mention in the artist's name or the name of the song but I'll just say
that your representative of this year's 2023 composition uh competition in Eurovision is
a no no no win it doesn't deserve to be in the final or anybody listening to it it's
that bad this young man Jan singing Gladiator got 12 points from the public vote think about
this and is not representing your country the public voted for this song and this artist
but the judges around the so-called little areas you're voting which I don't believe
in the voting system anymore two years back we had Mayhem in Italy we had Mayhem in Spain
and now we've got Mayhem in Poland because we sitting at home are supposed to accept
that your representative for the 2023 Eurovision was the best that you could produce unbelievable it's so bad it's bad and you
need to be told judges none of you judges should be a judge next year on the national
TV judging for any competition representing your country after turning down what could
have been one of the top five alternative well-written deep meaning and lyrically just
alternatively so good it's good and you're going to see why I am really as a musical
reactor going to public voted for him and when the judges votes came in he came to second
place compare the two I want you to go and look for I'm not I'm not looking go and look
for Poland's entry to Eurovision 2023 and see what you think then compare it to the
Public's winning act they wanted to represent their country and if you're not in agreement
with me that the judges are a bit iffy and that's an English word for a bit thinking
with their there must have been an all-male judge all around the country then I don't
know I just felt Jan you deserved it you really did who is John why are making such a fuss
I'll tell you now give a bit of Bio about the young man he deserves it Jan Rosen Rosa
monski is known as Jan polishing and songwriter he was born in Lubin and grew up in Gowellen
he's and he is the fourth of eight siblings his two old older sisters and an older brother
and two younger brothers now that in 2013 he participated in the first season of a television
program in Poland tell him and at the age of 12 he sang Grand Theatre in Warsaw for
three years he attended the music school in Gold Woollen which he didn't finish because
at the age of 16 he moved with his parents to the city of Newry in Great Britain. Can I just correct everybody for geography
reasons, Newry is in Ireland. In fact, it’s a town that is situated on
the border, the Irish Border, dividing Ireland and Northern Ireland. And if I was to just draw with my hand if
my hand represented Ireland and this is let's say Yep this is Dublin and you're travelling
up to the north are my fingers here the line here is the Border Nuri would be let's say
this finger just across and just before it on this side of the border is southern Ireland
and it's a village called Carlingford where my family is from and I couldn't believe that
I thought oh my God he went outside my Village across the border that's part of Northern
Ireland that is part of obviously uh Great Britain and he he was trained there in the
Arts so he um continues his education at the film performing arts school and another thing
Jan you need to know my sister is married to Flynn foreign so there you go and then
he currently lives in Warsaw now he releases Deputy single do you want to come over and
in 2022 released his mini album entitled power I'm going to be because of the connection
I'm going to be featuring you throughout 2023 I'm going to make the judges not the public
in Poland regret their decision and I have no faith in the judges anymore in in Eurovision
anywhere in the world because I'm honestly thinking it's corrupt I'm starting to think
more and more countries are corrupt and there's no such thing as different people around the
country voting I'm just thinking that and I don't know I think the whole process needs
to be re-examined it's becoming a mess and I think with you Jan not representing Poland
it's proof and a couple of years ago it was Italy in Spain now it's this year it's for
sure the judges somebody has done something and here's my final thing on the whole thing
I'm just going to say this don't forget that Ukraine only won Ukraine's act I think kalush
only won the competition because one of the judges was corrupt and they faced him when
a live camera appeared on him lead singer of clutch went forth and said you're corrupt
I know you are something's wrong here with the voting and you voted for these reasons
and there was a whole investigation that judge was sacked and it was proven right and Kush
went forth to represent Ukraine and won and now we're in Liverpool so think about that
Poland you need to be very, very, careful because when the public voted for Jan why
did he not win your vote why did you not support the Public's vote why does your vote overtake
the public the telephone and make you lots and lots of money I smell corruption but today
I'm going to justify this video this should have been 2023's representative for Poland
like comment and tell me what you think and if you agree subscribe Jan welcome to my channel
for 2023 and to the judges I get two fingers [Verse 1]
Welcome to the party, say hi to everybody Paid for by Martini but they're sippin' on
Bacardi Body's more than just a flesh, you can sell
it for success What's your price, what's your address? We can finish at my place
Ever been to Bali? I really need some sun
Such a shame 'bout that tsunami, I'll have to go to Cali
I can get you dressed, wrap your body in excess Give them something to obsess over
[Pre-Chorus] You'll love it when I
Give it to you, leave you wanting more I know your addiction's attention
Let's start a show Is it everything and more than you were hoping
for? Show us something we ain't never seen before [Chorus]
Smash your competition, baby Show us some good entertainment
Victory's your only payment Gladiator, gladiator [Verse 2]
Welcome to the party, I know it's kinda funny That everyone is acting like they know you
personally Just play along, be nice and all
You won't get far being on your own They've all been dying for a little drama
Their favourite stars getting out of coma To fill the news with 90s nostalgia
It will take more than just a pretty face to top that [Pre-Chorus]
Give it to you, leave you wanting more I know your addiction's attention
Let's start a show Is it everything and more than you were hoping
for? Now show us something we ain't never seen
before [Chorus]
Smash your competition, baby Show us some good entertainment
Victory's your only payment Gladiator, gladiator [Outro]
Fake it 'til you make it Mask on, never take it off
Wear it 'til wearing it feels natural Whatever you tell yourself it's not true
Power's what I make it Pixels like it's 8-bit
I'm picking your new favourite You buy it and I savour it
You buy it and I savour it You buy it and I savour it
You buy it and I savour it Buy it and I savour it
You buy it and I savour it now everybody agree with me agree with me
that ought to have represented 2023 Poland what a tune okay it was a dark video you saw
more of me and then I decided to improvise to give you something to you know look at
and then go back to the video Jan turn up the lights a little bit we need to see a bit
more of you what's going on it was very dark but theatrical and entertaining and the music
was electrifying and the lyrics are amazing as people are going to learn now and you're
going to shine a light in that dark video and come out of the situation the judges have
created in their own country and that is embarrassment really bad choice song when the public voted
for that you judges or to be accountable like clutch made the judge accountable and they
went on to win the competition prove the other artist that was going to represent Ukraine
and a couple of years back ought not have been because that judge favoured them now
who favoured the young lady that's representing you in Poland this year you deserve to be
at the bottom of the pile I'm going to wait and I'm going to smile when I see Poland at
the bottom because I am so angry as a musical because uh reactor because in Poland there
is a big record company that could have taken him on and could have projected him as look
we have Marilyn Manson we have Lady Gaga doing similar videos we've had Monica naranco in
Spain doing a similar video technique I can't name all the songs but there you have Jan
improvising improvisation with great music and being different it's what the music industry
needs plus it was poppy as well so it had everything quickly through because people
already know I'm angry and I don't want to you know be too carried away I think you get
my point welcome to the party yes John welcome say hi to everybody I certainly will I hope
I have paid for by Martini hmm I prefer vodka but they're sipping on Bacardi really bodies
more than just the flesh you can sell it for Success what's your price what's your address
we can finish at my place ever been to a ball I really need some sun it's a shame about
that to uh to Sami I've said it wrong I'll have to go to Cali I can never say that word
anyway what he's talking about is do I have to sell myself to be successful can people
just realize the talent I have not if you've got judges judging for Eurovision you can't
John but the outside world from this video will realize I agree with C-C he's Kick-Ass
why isn't it he was if they're from Poland representing my country and Polish people
are all around the world a big majority live in Ireland I can get you dressed wrap your
body he continues in excess give them something to obsess you'll love it when I give it to
you leave you wanting more I know your addictions attention let's start a show yeah why not
when you're attracted go for it rip off the clothes jump on the person do whatever you
have to get their attention I always say three minutes satisfaction with a person can be
better than a lifetime of hell with a person that you thought you were attracted to that
ended up to be a complete waste of time I've always encouraged go with your feelings it
continues smash your competition baby show us some good entertainment Victory zoning
your payment Gladiator and Gladiator represents the strength within yourself and your convictions
to do what you want to with your own body and mind that's what it's about for me verse
two welcome to the party I know it's kind of funny that everyone's acting like they
know you personally just play along be nice you won't get far been on your own they've
all been dying for a little drama your favourite stars getting out of a coma to fill the news
with 90s Nostalgia it'll take more than just a pretty face to top that so what he's talking
about past don't make the past to present don't live by your parents rules in the 90s
live for today 2023 and go in with the smile and if you want to have fun and take a little
and take a little take a little it's basically life's about partying not acting like you're
in a coma how many people say this is my friend and then they walk off and I'm left with these
comatose people I always say to my friends don't introduce me to your friends and the
next one I walk away from because my head is partying all the time and then finally
smash your competition baby show us some good entertainment victory's your own payment Gladiator
in other words be yourself have fun bring the strength within you outside and just Smash
It show everybody what I see and then the outré fake it till you make it mask on always
a lot of makeup high heels if you know and they go in with these false personas false
clothes that dress them up like turkeys and beneath it all we're all the same we're naked
when you cut her cut ourselves we all spill the same colour blood it's just straight back
honey he's trying to say Paris what makes it the power of belief is what makes it he's
saying you buy it I savour it you if you keep doing this I'll savour it. Because I like you for what you are but try
and be yourself because in the end he says; you buy it I savour it
And I Savour you Jan and I hope everyone else agrees that you would have represented Poland
good luck Poland good luck judges because you've a lot to account for because you are
going to need all the luck in the world with your current song. Bye.|||[Applause] [Music] [Applause] [Music] on tuesday 26th of april 2022 at the us ramstein air base in germany an important summit was held more than 40 allied countries met to pledge the military support necessary for ukraine to withstand the onslaught of the russian bear in just the first two months since the invasion began the allies have delivered more than five billion dollars in military aid to ukraine nobody is fooled by putin's pretext or his phony claims on donbass russia's invasion is indefensible and so are russian atrocities nations of goodwill from around the world stand united in our resolve to support ukraine in its fight against russia's imperial aggression lloyd austin u.s secretary of defense visualpolitik fans beyond igniting solidarity with ukraine the russian invasion has made one thing clear you cannot trust tyrants least of all from countries as hostile as russia the idea is that if you're serious about peace you have to prepare for war this is a sentiment that is spreading throughout virtually every allied country in the world from germany to japan to australia and that's exactly what explains new stories like these german defense investment will double country's 2022 debt how the ukraine war is changing japan tokyo moves towards a more assertive security strategy but it is precisely in the former warsaw pact countries that this idea is taking root the most if we want to avoid the worst i.e war we have to act according to that ancient rule that says if you want peace prepare for war jarroslaw kaczynski deputy prime minister of poland and leader of pis virtually all central and eastern european countries have realized that they have to start preparing for war and as we say around here no sooner said than done that's exactly what they are doing and head and shoulders above them all one country stands out that is gradually becoming an influential european power listen up [Music] a leading player when the soviet union collapsed in the early 1990s the newly independent ukraine was one of the most economically prosperous post-communist states prosperous in terms of the soviet context if you know what i mean because the truth is that everything that resulted from the former soviet union was a mess even so ukraine's price-adjusted gdp per capita was about 20 higher than that of poland and if this margin had been maintained until today and ukraine had managed to carry out a political and economic transition as effective as that of poland or the czech republic the ukrainian economy today would be almost two-thirds the size of the russian economy of course as you all well know the story was very different [Music] ukraine's three decades of independence have been characterized by economic stagnation internal divisions and institutional decay that made ukraine the poorest country in all of europe the crisis was such that the ukrainian economy did not rise above its 1989 level until 2005. this set the scene for the first russian invasion of crimea and lately the invasion of the whole country however over the last 10 years things started to change in ukraine and in kiev they found a key partner in this whole process of course we are talking about poland [Music] during the last decade poland has perhaps been the country that has most influenced ukraine's political economic and even cultural development it has been its strongest supporter within the european union and nato it took in more than 1.5 million ukrainian workers before the invasion and gave this country the model to be able to leap into development [Music] we are talking about two countries with very close ties to each other in fact for centuries they were part of the polish lithuanian commonwealth and more recently they shared their rejection of soviet occupation there cannot be a free poland without a free ukraine nor a free ukraine without a free poland polish folk seeing well now after the russian invasion of ukraine poland has become one of the key players in the political news and also the country that is leading the european preparation for war listen up the new polish power russia's invasion of ukraine has made poland one of the key players in the crisis the country that is leading along with the united states and the united kingdom in supporting ukraine delivering military weaponry and hosting hundreds and hundreds of thousands millions of refugees in the first three weeks after the russian invasion alone poland took in more than two million refugees to give you an idea practically overnight it became fourth on the list for countries with the most refugees in the world behind only turkey colombia and the united states [Music] [Applause] since the beginning of the war the polish government and society have mobilized to put in place an unprecedented system of housing transportation food psychological support and aid of all kinds the polish government is even paying smaller monthly allowances to families who have arrived from ukraine to help get them by refugees are allowed to seek work in the country and the health and the education system has also been opened wide to them tens of thousands of ukrainian children are already enrolled in polish schools we are talking about a titanic effort and that's not all poland has also become the gateway to ukraine for western arms and supplies and one of the most relevant political players of the moment ukraine war turns poland into america's indispensable ally in other words poland has suddenly become one of the biggest adversaries of vladimir putin's russia it is also an example of the military race ahead because visual politic viewers poland is in the process of doubling its armed forces from about 110 000 troops to around 250 000 while also aiming to become one of the most modern armies in europe it is an extraordinary and historic moment the introduction of poland into a completely new world of cutting-edge technology modern weaponry and defensive means andrei duda president of poland because let's not forget that poland has a direct border with both russia through kaliningrad and belarus perhaps that is why poland is one of the few european countries whose military budget exceeds the 2 of gdp set as a minimum target by nato still in october 2021 polish deputy prime minister jarosuev kaczynski announced the country's intention to further raise its military effort to at least three percent of gdp thus in addition to more than doubling the size of its armed forces the polish government also wants to expand its territorial defense forces a support army composed of volunteer soldiers and above all to modernize its military arsenal by replacing combat systems dating back to the soviet era who knows how much of this equipment ends up or rather is seeing its last days fighting in ukraine what better time to clean up don't you think for example the polish army was still operating some 500 t-72 tanks when the russian offensive began and in its air force we still find aircraft such as mig-29s and su-22s however everything indicates that this situation will change very soon and not only because of arms shipments to ukraine in july 2021 for example the polish government announced the purchase of 250 u.s abram tanks to supplement the 250 leopard twos it currently has in its inventory another example is its aging air force over the last decade the number of operational fighter jets in poland fell from 128 to 98. to remedy this situation in 2020 the government announced a 4.6 billion deal for 32 f-35 aircraft to be delivered in 2024 that same year it also required a patriot type anti-aircraft battery system for 4.8 billion dollars more recently in may 2021 it acquired 24 bayracktar tb2 turkish drones all in all this is just a drop in the ocean in order to modernize its armed forces poland will have to make a major budgetary effort over the next few years however the government seems more than willing and that is not just us talking but rather the deputy prime minister and leader of the ruling party yaroslav kaczynski says so himself take a look it is better to be safe and a little more indebted jaroslaw kaczynski deputy prime minister of poland but while poland is perhaps the country that is leading the way in this kind of war preparation in eastern europe it is by no means the only one listen up [Music] fight club throughout central eastern europe they are generally very clear they do not trust moscow at all even being part of nato is not seen as enough so one way or another virtually all countries in this region are starting to get their act together to follow in poland's footsteps a good example is the czech republic a country where military spending has not exactly been a priority in recent years in 2022 for example only 1.35 percent of gdp was budgeted to be spent on defence which in any case was already a significant jump from the 0.95 they spent in 2015. be that as it may this is something that is going to change completely the czech government has announced that it intends to increase its military budget by 60 by 2025. bulgaria romania and the baltic republics are also announcing considerable increases in their military budgets romania wants to increase defence spending to 2.5 percent of gdp along the same lines estonia latvia and lithuania are going to increase their military spending by well over two percent and rest assured they will do so taking good note of what happened in ukraine for example i bet you anything that javelins will pay a very prominent role lithuania to spend over 1 billion dollars on weapons from us germany of course preparing for war is not exclusively about military spending or political relations there are many more variables that we have to take into account and one of them a very important one is the infrastructure and while you may be surprised this can be a weak point to win a war or pursue an effective deterrent strategy you don't just need an army you also need to be able to move it that's why this is precisely why in 2021 the connecting europe facility was agreed on a european union funding vehicle that provides 1.7 billion dollars to improve military mobility however we are talking about a very scarce budget at a time when the war has made it clear that these kind of provisions are needed so now we can say that the russian invasion of ukraine is making this issue a priority to prepare roads trains bridges ports and airports so that if necessary a lot of troops can be moved quickly [Music] this is especially urgent in eastern europe where many key pieces of infrastructure such as bridges may not be able to withstand the weight of american british or german tanks in europe one has had the view that if we didn't need to spend on defence since the 24th of february when russia attacked ukraine that view has changed completely george reichels analyst at the center for european politics for example one of the projects that could be accelerated the most is rail baltic a 5.8 billion euro that's over 6 billion us dollars standard gauge rail link connecting estonia latvia and lithuania with poland indispensable infrastructure to ensure that large troop movements could be carried out quickly in fact there is even talk of extending this line from estonia to finland by means of a tunnel under the sea well we can now expect this and other infrastructure projects to pick up much more speed so you see infrastructure is another important way to prepare for war and enhance europe's deterrent strategy visualpolitik fans history keeps telling us that a military victory does not always mean a geopolitical victory sometimes war only means defeat no matter what happens on the battlefield the u.s experience in afghanistan and iraq makes this clear as does moscow's own experience with the invasion of hungary in 1956 the invasion of czechoslovakia in 1968 or the imposition of martial law in poland itself in 1981 in all of these cases triumph on the battlefields did not amount to a victory on the contrary we could say that they were small triumphs of a country that was already losing the cold war and that was unable to unite and win the loyalty of even its warsaw pact allies in fact in all of these cases the military intervention irretrievably distance hungarian czech and polish citizens much further from russia regardless of what happens on the battlefields of ukraine where russia is already paying a huge price in economic military and human terms the outcome of the war is going to be exactly the opposite of what moscow intended the distance distrust and hostility of ukrainians toward russia will last for years if not decades nato will emerge stronger more cohesive better prepared and with the incorporation of new countries from all this hardship we will talk about this soon here on visualpolitik if putin wanted less nato united against russia he's achieved the opposite and russia is also going to have a border with much more heavily armed and fortified neighbors for years russia has been trying to intimidate its former warsaw pact allies now it's only emboldened them but they will soon be in a position to look russia itself in the eye and to top it all off it is turning poland into a continental power [Music] whichever way you look at it russia has lost this war of course we already knew that if we were to hand out an award for the most absurd harebrained and counterproductive political idea of the last decade it would be hard to find a better candidate than putin with his heinous invasion of ukraine but at this point it's your turn how do you view the plans of the eastern european countries do you think poland will eventually establish itself as a full-fledged european power should the rest of europe follow suit leave us your comments below and now if you found this video interesting don't forget to like and subscribe to visualpolitik if you haven't already done so all the best i'll see you next time [Music] you|||Present moment. The only thing you can enjoy 
the most. Don't waste it. Just live it. Just live it.|||Have you ever wondered what would happen if
a bunch of ants fell down a hole into an old Cold War bunker
with no way out? No? Just me? Well, while this sounds a bit like the beginnings
of an entomology-themed horror film, it really
happened! And how these ants acted under such extreme circumstances can tell us about what those
ants do normal– because even trapped in a nightmare, they
kept on ant-ing. [♪ INTRO] Allow me to set the scene. It’s the early twenty-tens in Poland, in a long abandoned Soviet bunker that once
housed nuclear missiles during the Cold War. Inside the bunker is a colony of wood ants. Although, I use the word colony loosely here because these ants didn’t choose the bunker
life. This bunker is underground and covered over with trees and dirt as camouflage. Inside, it’s cold, dark, and mostly empty
after being sealed off and made illegal to enter by authorities. Wood ants are pretty common in these forests, and a colony of them happened to build a nest over the top of a vertical ventilation pipe
for the bunker. Over time, the pipe’s metal outlet covering rusted through, leaving a hole. This caused ants from the nest above to fall onto the bunker floor below, with no way of getting back up or out of the
bunker. But that didn’t stop the ants from doing
what they do best: nesting. A team of researchers were tipped off to the
presence of this nest and found a way into the bunker. Because what are a few trespassing laws when
there’s science to do? Once inside, the researchers could see these
ants were building and maintaining a nest, removing
dead ants, and depositing them in ant cemeteries far
from the nest to keep it clean and prevent any potential
disease from spreading. And all of this this is very normal ant behavior. But, the only ants they saw were workers – no queens, drones, or larvae. The constant rain of ants through the ventilation
pipe was the only thing sustaining the bunker’s
population. And there was evidence that these ants had
been at it for years, doing their ant thing under some pretty harsh
conditions. But what were they eating down there? Well typically wood ants feed not on wood, but on the waste produced by aphids as they
feed on tree sap. But there’s no aphids in an underground
bunker. When the researchers inspected the ants in
the cemeteries, it became clear they had been snacking on
each other. Which is not super surprising, given the lack
of other available options. Now typically, cannibalizing your friends
isn’t something social insects, like ant colonies,
do on the regular. However, wood ants are a known exception to
this rule. Every spring, when various forest colonies
are coming out of their winter dormancy period,
they engage in ant wars, killing each other en masse and then feasting
on the corpses. This establishes colony borders, and provides
food for the victors in the early days of spring
when food is scarce. Also, I want you to know that “ant wars”
is in fact the term used in the published literature. So, snacking on other wood ants is actually
normal! Eating members of the same colony is not that normal until they’re desperate. But, our bunker ants were just doing what
they had to do to survive. And they probably didn’t flinch too much
at this choice, considering they’re already predisposed
to the behavior. Now, in case you were worried, the researchers
didn’t just finish their research and bounce out of there, leaving the bunker ants to their own devices. Instead, they assembled a vertical boardwalk
out of a two by four, to connect the floor with the ventilation
pipe and give the bunker ants a way to reunite with
their original colony above. So hopefully, that put an end to it all, at
least for this particular bunker! Now a Cold War bunker full of ants is one
of the worst things I can imagine getting someone
for the holidays. Our merch site, dftba.com/scishow, has lots
of gifts that are both more portable and less prone
to biting. In particular, if you watched this episode
and feel in the mood for more incredibly specific animal behaviors, you might like our bucket hat with an orca
that’s wearing its own hat. But! If you want your purchase to arrive anywhere
within the US by December 24th with standard shipping, you need to order by December 8th, 2023. Now, if you're watching this video in a different
year, it's probably a different date. But if it's this year, then don't forget, December 8th, and don't forget to be awesome. [♪ OUTRO]|||Blessed are the curious, for they shall have adventures... Travelling is the one of the things we love doing together and when we cannot travel for a long time, we simply suffer. Because of pandemic reasons and postpandemic, this year we didn't go anywhere abroad Firstly, we visited our Polish seaside which you could see in my previous vlog. Then, in July we spent some time together, just the two of us, glamping for the first time in the Polish mountains. It was a nice experience but sometimes scary because of the thunderstorms. And then, in August we decided to go to the seaside again but this time the weather wasn't really good You never know what to expect in Poland, so you have to be prepared for, actually, any kind of weather. I'm going to share the destinations with you in the video description, so maybe one day you may visit them. Or you already have! If so, then you camleave a comment and share your opinion with us. And as you may have noticed, we've started the year in four but we are going to finish it in five...|||[Music] there was once a day that I would pray for
you I'd go and miss good morning guys how you guys doing welcome you all to my channel
is this your first time of coming to my channel thanks a lot I am a Nigerian currently doing
my MSC in Poland and I just got in yesterday so I have my previous Vlog on you know travel
with me so today is my first day but you guys I am not getting it at all because I have
a missing luggage so basically half of my two bags I have one with me and the second
one is missing and this is just making me to be you know disorganized I really don't
know how to explain it but it's not really a good idea so the thing is the thing is on
my passport it indicates that I have two luggage but when I go to Poland they can only find
one of my luggage so I went ahead to make complaints you know telling them that I am
looking for my second luggage and they said that they are going to track it and they are
going to get us back get them back so I'm just hoping that it doesn't take too long
because I really don't know how to survive it's just going to make me to stop buying
unnecessary things or things that I already have so now I want to brush my toothpaste
is with me now I want to brush my toothpaste is with me my brush is in the second luggage
I want to have my shower my sponges with me but my soap is in the second luggage it's
just making me to be so organized I don't have my pot I don't have any food items with
me so basically I was not able to eat yesterday I just slept like that because I was almost
so tired my voice is a bit cracky because I am on medications um and my medications
and know with me they're also in the missing luggage so it's not even a good experience
at so I really don't know how to say because it feels like your life is not organized and
I'm going to end up spending more to try to get those things back so at least I can sustain
while I wait for my bag so this is my first ninth year and I feel like because of the
missing luggage I didn't really have like a very good night because I just slept I was
so hungry I was tired I was stressed I needed to take my medication I couldn't find them
ha I was so stressed and I was extremely cold so I got to Wausau by 9 00 am in the morning
and I was at the airport to like around two or three looking for missing luggage under
the code like you can imagine and at the end of the day they can't find it so I feel they
formed they asked me to fill a form to describe my bags and they're going to help me to track
it and hopefully I get it as soon as possible so that is basically the update so I'm going
to be bringing you guys along with me today um this is my first day and yeah welcome you
guys to Poland thank you so much for being on this journey with me you guys because we
are going to ride on this journey together let me know what kind of content you want
I am currently staying in the dormitory um and we are three in the room so we are three
in the room and I'm currently staying in the dormitory so let me guys know if you want
me to do like a room Vlog for you guys please go ahead and put it down in the comment section
so that I can show you guys what the dormitory looks like so now the first thing I have to
do now is to lay my beds um I think we're going to do that together and just plan my
day it's back but actually I've caught them and they said that I should expect it in two
days and they are going to send it to me so while I'm waiting for my luggage I need to
just shop for certain things and also get like my winter jackets because you guys it
is so cold I have about three inner and this winter jacket from Nigeria but this jacket
is not catching the code like I still feel cold so anyways that's what I'm up to today
and I'm going to bring you guys along with me why we got together so let's go so guys I basically want to check out the
winter jacket and this is what I have so let's go let's test them and see how it fits well
we are drifting for winter jacket I think it's also necessary for you to check out like
the Zips and the button to make sure that they are fitting because after I said like
two and the Zips actually went out so let me show you guys what we have this way I think
this is nice so I'll definitely be taking this and it's actually very Ticky guys because
the weather is so cold so yeah this is what it looks like so I'll be picking up this and
I'll show you guys the second one so let me go ahead now and test it and this is also
trips it's a thrift winter jacket so the price is a bit less compared to new one but so this
is the second one it actually fits well to be honest and the zip is working the buttons
are working bro this is not thick like it's not as thick as I want because you guys the
weather is not smiling so maybe this can go for fall or something but for winter it is
not thick so I'm definitely not taking this even though it fits well because I want something
really thick and I also love the fact that it has like a belt here so it can tighten
your waist and then give it a shape but regardless you know this is the full outfits yeah so
guys this is another one I really love the color I love how brown the color is and also
with the fact that you can use it to cover your nose and your mouth because you guys
it's like the code enters through the nose and through the mouth so having this is not
really a bad idea but the fact that it can pretty cover my nose and my mouth but the
reason why I'm a bit skeptical about this is the fact that it is not as thick as the
black one so but the color is nice and I love the fact that it can cover the nose but the
thickness is not that thick you guys get so let me show you guys like the full the color is nice bro what do you guys think
I feel like it's actually more beautiful than the black one but the thickness and this winter
I don't know so let me just test the next one and then we choose so this is the third
one and it's actually pink it has like Woody and this is what it looks like some basically
contemplating between this and that brown one the brown one is actually cute but it's
not as thick as this and also because I have like a black one you know which is actually
six I'm like do I need to take two blocks or should I just mix this with the brown but
the brown one is not as thick because it's weather hmm is not friendly for me so let
me know what you guys think Beauty over quality guys let me show you how it's cold the weather
is and I'm still feeling cold so I have this thought to neck which is like a very thick
dark snake and I have this is it cardigan and this is actually very thick like for Nigerian
weather this is over tea and I still have the third one which I'm going to put on now
I didn't put on my gloves so winter jacket is actually nice so let me show you guys the
price I got this the black one that I chose I really like this compared to the rest because
it's thick and then it's black so it's something that you can wear on different outfits or
like the same day and nobody actually cares to be honest so this is actually 55 SWAT team
this is 55 zooty and it is streamed so I'm going to pick up this and it's actually very
thick so let me go ahead now to the shoe area and I'm going to bring you guys along you
guys to think about this this is actually cute and is also thick so I love the fact
that it has like a sided zipper the zipper is at the side and the color is like gray
it's not dark it's not black it's like a gray color a deep gray color so I love the fact
that you know it has a sided zip and also it has this thing at the waist to like tighten
this up so I think I'm basically going to take this and the black one I initially tested
so that is it so let's go ahead now and shop for a fairly Used winter boots and I'll definitely
bring you guys along [Music] [Applause] [Music] [Applause] so guys
the major issue I have with all these winter boots is the fact that it just opens at this
part but I feel like there's this adjustable strap that I can use to adjust it so that
it can be fitted at this upper part so I think this is nice and what do you guys think and
this is going for 34 is worthy so I've not adjusted this but I have adjusted this so
you guys can basically see the difference so let me know what you guys think and this
is what it looks like so guys after shopping this is basically what
I have I put on the winter jacket because you guys it's even too cold for me to find
my way to the hostel and this is the winter jacket I picked and also this um winter shoe
this is what it looks like so they also did um Discount sales today so for both the winter
jacket and the shoe I paid 71 Johnson so let me show you guys like the full view of what
I have what do you guys think about it I love the fact that I think I can be warm because
you guys it's cold it's not easy and this winter jacket is actually very thick and then
the winter shoe on a discount in a cheap shop for 71's worthy I think is a good deal so
this is what I basically have [Music] thank you [Music] foreign [Music] foreign [Music] [Music] foreign [Music] foreign [Music] foreign [Music] [Applause] [Music] [Music] [Music] [Music] [Music] so catch me if I fall [Music] thank you [Music] [Applause] [Music] let me know [Music]|||In my view, I think North Korea is the world’s largest illegal job agency. It’s a company. The North Korean's final workday is recorded accurately in the investigative report. The shift begins as it does everyday at six in the morning. The 41-year-old labourer is welding pipes in the stern of the Norwegian ship, the Polar Empress. Suddenly, his clothes begin to burn. But only after crawling out of the tank on all fours completely engulfed in flames, does a Polish co-worker hurry over to help him. He tries to put out the flames with fire extinguishers and water bottles. However, the labourer’s clothing continuesly reignites, until he can no longer be saved. He dies one day later in a Polish hospital. 95% of his skin was burned. I meet with the labourer inspector, who is responsible for investigating the accident. The labourer’s body was sent back to North Korea. together with 637 euros for his family. You may have heard of North Korean forced labourers from reports about labour camps in Russia or from Qatar, where stadiums are being built for the FIFA World Cup. But could there be North Korean forced labourers in Poland, in the middle of the EU? On its website, the CRIST shipyard advertises that they build ships for various clients throughout Europe. And we know that North Koreans are still working here today. We went to speak directly with the labourers to find out what their working conditions are really like. In order to protect the labourer’s identity, we’ve concealed his face and altered his voice. OK. Let's go. Thanks. The North Korean man who died in the accident also worked for the company Armex. We wanted to find out how this kind of accident could have happened and how the laborers are paid so we asked the company for an interview But the manging director, Cecylia Kowalska, refused to talk to us. So, we tried to get a hold of her in her office We weren't able to find Cecylia Kowalska but we discovered that she's the managing director of another company it's called Alson and it employs North Korean laborers at the Nauta shipyard. Lately, a mine hunting vessel belonging to the French navy has been repaired in the Nauta shipyard. In 2015, the North Koreans worked on constructing a supply ship meant to be deployed to a British off shore wind park We wait outside the ship yard to talk to North Korean laborers First to leave the site is a man who looks conspicuously different to a normal worker. The man makes it clear to us that he doesn't want to answer any questions Then, he calls another colleague for help. Together, they monitor the exit of the shipyard Since, we can no longer talk to the laborers without being watched we decide to leave. What are the objectives of your working group and why was it created? It was created because we heard about the DPRK forced labour in the European Union which is well, strange to say the least, it took me by surprise Most of the DPRK laborers, they are, to a certain extent a leftover from the Cold War period Under Kim Jong-Un, this practice has seen a huge revival. Why does North Korea send laborers abroad? In my view, I think, North Korea is the world's largest illegal job agency There is no real North Korean states There is North Korea or Pyongyang, Incorporated It's a company. Due to international sanctions, the regime has hardly any opportunities to earn foreign currency That's why Kim Jong-Un is sending laborers abroad primarily to China and Russia. Approximately 50,000 North Koreans are doing forced labor generating up to 2 billion dollars, according to the UN. Poland is especially important for North Korea because companies here pay the highest rates, comparatively. Cecylia Kowalska isn't only the managing director of Armex and Alson. She's also involved in a 3rd company, called Wonye, with 2 North Korean partners. We head to Wonye's office to see if we can find Kowalska there. We don't meet anyone in the office complex Instead, we find out more about one of Ms. Kowalska's business partners. His name Kang Hung Gu and he was born in 1961. In a population register smuggled out of North Korea we find only one Kang Hong Gu with the same birth date. In 2004, this man was the commander of a brigade in North Korea. We want to know what such a high ranking member of the North Korean regime is doing in Poland and so we head to the address where he is registered, according to Polish authorities But none of the gas station employees have ever heard of him or of Wonye. So, we ask village residents if they have ever seen North Koreans in their area. And they live here? We didn't find Kang Hong Gu but apparently North Korean laborers don't just work in shipyards they also work in agriculture. We wanted to know why Cecylia Kowalska
has a company with a North Korean who, allegedly, is a high ranking member of the North Korean regime. We head back to Gdansk and try again to find her at her office. Cecylia Kowalska says she pays each laborer in cash but on a pay stub from 2014, it looks like the same person signed for all the North Korean laborers On top of that, one of the laborers told us outside the shipyard that he doesn't receive his salary from Armex but from a totally different company. Based on what the pay stub says, it's clear the North Koreans worked on ships belonging to Danish and Norwegian shipping companies. According to the labor inspection record the company Armex worked together with the North Korean company Rungrado General Trading Corporation, which is the same company that also sends construction workers from North Korea to other Polish cities. Since, there's no way to gain access to the construction site to talk to the laborers there, I asked the security guard. The construction company Atal declined to give us an interview but they inform us in writing that it isn't them but rather a subsidiary, J.P. Construct,
that would work with North Koreans. But the business is still in the family, The managing director of J.P. Construct is the son of the Atal chairman. We have received reports from inspections carried out by the labor inspectors from 2013 to 2015. According to these documents, the North Korean company, Rungrado Trading sent welders to Cecylia Kowalska's company Armex who then put them to work in the shipyards. The same documents show that Rungrado Trading also set construction workers to the company J.P. Construct who then employed them on the building sites of the construction company Atal In return, Rungrado Training received money. Rungrado Trading is a state owned company run by the North Korean Worker's Party whose chairman is dictator, Kim Jong-Un. It seems that most, if not all, of the money that's being earned goes to the state rather directly or through a company that's owned by the State A North Korean laborer in Europe earns about 80 to 160 dollars per month that's what he keeps or she keeps himself if he or she is lucky But they're paid much more than that and that money goes straight into the pocket of the North Korean State. Rungrado Trading describes itself, in an advertising brochure as a company that trades in cosmetics, mineral water, and clothing. However, the UN suspects Rungrado Trading of being involved in smuggling parts of SCAT missiles to Egypt. And it's precisely this company that's sending laborers to Poland. We wanted to find out how it's at all possible that North Koreans can work in Poland. So, we met the deputy director of the regional government office responsible for handing out working permits to foreigners We weren't able to find out why the authorities apparently don't differentiate between two countries. But our official confirmed that North Koreans can work in Poland in a completely legal way. It makes Poland the only country in the EU, besides Malta, where that's possible. We went to the National Labor Inspector at PIP. Over the last 5 years, it has inspected a dozen companies where North Koreans worked. We traveled to another big construction site to see how the working conditions are for North Koreans here. Atal is one of the leading Polish construction companies and specialize primarily in the construction of luxury apartments. When Polish Newsweek journalists ask about working with North Korea Atal answered in February, 2016: "Running an ethical business primarily means lawful trade." This seems to imply that as long as you follow the law working together with an inhumane dictatorship would be OK. The laborers in Wroclaw and Warsaw seem to work 12 hours non-stop each day that's only allowed if the laborers are compensated for over time. We want to know where and how the laborers live so we follow their bus. Since it was impossible to get into the compound to speak to the workers we call a North Korean laborer who gave us his number. In order to find out what kind of conditions North Koreans work in abroad, we meet the former guard of a prison camp for political dissidence. Ahn Myung Chul fled North Korea and now runs an aid organisation that draws attention to the forced laborer situation. Even the Polish authorities confirm that the North Koreans live in isolation. The Border Patrol was quoted in Poland's Newsweek magazine as saying: "They are an isolated crew that doesn't take advantage of their right to move freely within our country and all activities could only be undertaken in the presence of an appointed representative who acts as a minder." We wanted to find out more about it from the authorities, but they declined to give us an interview. We make an appointment with Kim Seung Cheol, who is one of the very few North Koreans who fled while working in Russia, he explains to us why he thinks so few laborers flee. A North Korean also fled during his stay in Poland last year the Polish Foreigners Registration Office confirms that he received asylum but doesn't want to say anything further about it. This basically means that North Korea can dispatch laborers to Poland completely legally and that the same laborers can get asylum if they no longer want to be exploited as forced laborers in the very same country. According to the International Labor Organization aspects of forced labor include; threats of punishment, excessive over time, deprevation of wages, and being forced to live in isolation. Which sounds exactly like the conditions under which North Koreans work in Polish shipyards. The laborer says that he has worked over 60 hours per week for the past 2 and half years without vacation or contact with his family. We head back to meet with Cecylia Kowalska
to confront her with this information. Nevertheless, Cecylia Kowalska honored the North Korean cabinets in the name of her company: Armex. Gifts presented to President Kim-Il Sung and Leader Kim Jung-Il by foreign heads of state, politicians, and public figures. This sword was presented by the president and vice president of the Armex Company Limited of Poland, on January 12th- The president of Armex is Cecylia Kowalska. The gift expresses the wish that Leader Kim Jung-Il would bring about not only peace on Korea but peace in independent's cause in the world. We tried to speak to the North Korean embassy about their country's close work with Armex but it didn't answer our repeated requests for an interview. So we headed directly to the embassy but as soon as we get out of the car employees come out to send us away they make it clear that they are keeping an eye on us. We want to know from the Polish Ministry of Labor how many North Koreans are currently working in Poland. But they don't answer us either. They apparently issued 1,972 work Visas to North Koreans over the last 5 years. but don't know how many of them are currently working in Poland. The fact that the European Commission officially knows nothing about this is pretty bad. But what's worse is that the EU is regularly helping to finance the forced labor through development plans. Over 70 million euros in EU funds have flowed into Crist and Nauta alone in recent years. Right into the shipyards, in which forced laborers from North Korea are exploited. But Poland has been behaving this way for over a decade. North Korean laborers have been toiling away here for years completely isolated from the outside world and their families And the meager amounts that they are paid; end up in the pockets of the regime. As long as this continues, it's not only North Korea who will profit from the forced labor but Europe's economy as well.|||PHIL BLACK, CNN, ESTONIA. >>> U.S. SOLDIERS OFFICIALLY  WELCOMED AT THE OPENING CEREMONY IN POLAND, WHERE THE PRIME  MINISTER CALLED IT A GREAT DAY. GIVE US YOUR ASSESSMENT OF THE  DEPLOYMENT AND IT'S IMPORTANCE? >> I HAVE BEEN INVOLVED IN IT  SINCE THE BEGINNING WHEN I WAS  STILL WEARING THE UNIFORM, AND  WE STARTED THE PLANNING FOR THIS IN 2004 AS WE TKPWPB THE  DRAWDOWN OF THE SIZE OF THE  FORCE IN EUROPE, AND THE SIZE OF THE U.S. FORCE IN EUROPE. THERE WERE 100,000 SOLDIERS IN  EUROPE IN THE LATE 1990s, AND  THERE'S ABOUT 30,000 PERMANENTLY STATIONED THERE NOW. THIS ROTATIONAL BRIGADE IS A  CRITICAL PART OF REINFORCING AND REINSURING OUR ALLIES, AND WHAT  IS GOING ON WITH RUSSIA, THEY  HAVE A STRATEGY OF UNDERMINING  THE COMPETENCE THAT THE NATO  NATIONS HAVE IN THE ARTICLE 5  PROCEDURES, AND THAT ARTICLE 5  IS IF ONE NATION ATTACKED,  OTHERS WILL COME TO THEIR AID. THIS REASSURANCE IS SAYING TO  NATO, WE WILL BE THERE FOR YOU  AND IT'S IMPORTANT AND IT HAS  BEEN GOING ON FOR THE LAST  SEVERAL YEARS, BUT THIS IS THE  FIRST TIME WE HAVE STATIONED  SOLDIERS IN POLAND ITSELF. >> HOW DO YOU THINK THIS MOVE BY PRESIDENT OBAMA MAY SHAPE WHAT  DONALD TRUMP DOES MOVING  FORWARD? >> WELL, AGAIN, THIS HAS BEEN IN THE WORKS FOR A WHILE, AND THIS  WAS NOT GEARED TOWARD THE  INAUGURATION AND WHAT IS GOING  ON THIS MONTH WITH OUR POLITICS, AND IT HAS TO DO WITH  REINFORCING NATO. IT WILL GIVE THE TRUMP  ADMINISTRATION A LITTLE TIME TO  CONSIDER THIS AS HE TALKS TO OUR EUROPEAN ALLIES AND GETS A  FIRMER GRIP ON WHAT GOES ON IN  NATO, SO IT WILL BE IMPORTANT TO HAVE THESE 5,000 ADDITIONAL  TROOPS CONDUCTING EXERCISES IN  KEY NATO COUNTRIES. >> LET'S LISTEN TO THE POLISH  PRIME MINISTER AND WHAT HE HAD  TO SAY. >> Translator: THIS IS VERY  IMPORTANT FOR POLAND AND THE  REGION AND WE LIVE IN EUROPE  WHERE RUSSIAN POLICY IS  CONTROVERSIALAL, AND THIS  CONSTITUTE A THREAT AND WE ARE  CONS CONSCIOUS. >> SHE POINTS OUT AT THE END OF  THE DAY, IF THERE IS A WARMING  BETWEEN THE U.S. AND RUSSIA IN  SOME CAPACITY, THAT PUTS POLAND  IN A DELICATE POSITION? >> A WARMING WOULD BE A GOOD  THING, AND ALL HISTORICAL  RELATIONS ARE THAT PUTIN HAS A  STRATEGY AND WE HAVE TO  UNDERSTAND THIS. IT'S NOT WHETHER YOU LIKE OR  DISLIKE A PERSON, AND IT HAS TO  DO WITH HIS STRATEGY FOR THE  COUNTRY OF RUSSIA, AND PHIL  BLACK MENTIONED THE ISSUE WITH  LITHUANIA, AND THEY HAD TO FIGHT FOR THEIR FREEDOM IN 1990. GOOGLE LITHUANIA, AND THERE WERE CITIZENS LITERALLY APPROACHING  RUSSIAN TANKS WITH THEIR FISTS  IN THEIR TOWN SQUARES, AND THEY  WANT THEM OUT. THIS IS A GOOD THING FOR THE  NATO COUNTRIES, AND POLAND AND  THE POLITICS JOINED NATO IN 2004 AND THEY WANT TO SEE ASSURANCES  THEY WILL BE DEFENDED UNDER  ARTICLE 5. >> EARLIER IN THE WEEK, MATTIS  SAID HE SUPPORTS NATO AND THAT  IS SOMETHING THAT GOES AGAINST  THE GRAIN OF WHAT  PRESIDENT-ELECT TRUMP SAID. WHAT DO YOU MAKE OF THAT  RELATIONSHIP? >> GENERAL MATTIS SAID HE NOT  ONLY SUPPORTS NATO, AND HE SAID  IF NATO WAS NOT IN EXISTENCE NOW WE WOULD HAVE TO CREATE IT, AND  THAT'S A HUGE STATEMENT ON THE  GUY GETTING PART OF THE  SECRETARY OF DEFENSE WHAT  COUNTERS WHAT TRUMP SAID DURING  HIS ENTIRE CAMPAIGN. NATO IS AN IMPORTANT ALLIANCE  AND WE HAVE TO KEEP IT STRONG,  AND IT HAS TRANSFORMED ORR ITS  YEARS TO ADDRESS ITS THREAT  TODAY UNLIKE WHAT MR. TRUMP|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Since Poland’s most recent election in late
2015, rapid and potentially unconstitutional changes have created severe tensions within
the European Union. The new conservative, anti-EU ruling party
in Poland has already been faced with threats of sanctions and a loss of voting power. So, what exactly did Poland do? And why is it alarming the EU? Well, to put Poland in perspective, it is
the largest economy in Central Europe. Joining the EU marked an important transition
for the the country, away from their authoritarian communist past. However, following several years of coalition
efforts between liberal and conservative parties, in October 2015, the right wing Law and Justice
party won a majority in parliament. This was the first time a single party held
majority power since the country restored democracy in 1989. Immediately after gaining control, the party
pushed through a number of changes. First, they dismissed and replaced five recently
appointed Constitutional judges. Soon after, they passed a law reorganizing
the Constitutional Court, forcing a two-thirds majority for changes. This directly conflicts with the Constitutional
requirement of a simple majority. That made it considerably more difficult to
change new legislation passed by the Law and Justice controlled parliament . Poland also passed a new media law, which
replaced the administration of the nation’s public television and radio broadcasters with
a former Law and Justice member of parliament. This series of new laws was quickly met with
opposition from the Polish public, with tens of thousands of citizens protesting in December
of 2015. Moreover, the President of the European Parliament
referred to this shift as being similar to a “coup”. Other members of the EU have discussed imposing
sanctions on Poland. However, neighboring Hungary has dismissed
the possibility, as they would refuse to take part in a unanimous vote to sanction. This is particularly important, as Hungary
has also come under fire in recent years for its own media restructuring laws, which many
say mirror Poland’s current crisis. The strongest rebuke has come from Germany;
As Poland’s largest trading partner, it accounts for nearly a quarter of both exports
and imports. In response, Polish media has compared German
Chancellor [An-guh-la] Merkel to Adolf Hitler, suggesting that Germany is seeking to control
Poland as they did in World War Two. By early January 2016, the European Commission
began an investigation on the basis of Article 7 of the Treaty of Lisbon. This states that if a member of the EU seriously
breaches the union’s values, they can be stripped of their voting rights. As the controversy continues, it is likely
that the EU will take action, either legal or diplomatic, to end what is considered Poland’s
violation of constitutional balance. With Poland’s parliament currently unopposed,
the Law and Justice party may be ushering in a new conservative era in Polish politics. What happens in Poland has the ability to
shift the balance of the European Union, largely due to their economic and political influence. To find out just how powerful Poland is, check
out our video. Thanks for watching Test Tube News, don’t
forget to like and subscribe for new videos every day!|||Parris Ksenia kudos for ski Jenga please national doctor comes more like elsewhere in Europe and Poland to the far right is getting stronger and louder dodging the nationalist movement in Poland was made of a number of groups associated with racism anti-semitism and violence until recently they've been almost exclusively made but now more and more girls are joining the far right and as a female journalist I wanted to understand why what is driving them to join these groups at a nationalist rally earlier this year I met 19 year old Polina Cohen as a new member of the National radical camp perceived as one of the most extreme arms of the nationalist movement she agreed to be my guide and let me spend some time with her over the coming months I was given rare access to the group and traveled with her to the national radical summer camp they're supposed to party outside the organization describes itself as a youth-led social movement which aims to revive nationalist and Catholic values for harm no booze which opposes just King Brugada so much it's redundant Giovanni who Paco three hunters about me see much of a upon stone but good I need to get lost enough a festival de banda sikozu sidarsky see Pasha Pasha sneak attack is waging a fascist this dish mizura technotrekker for some language propagule fascism Little Snitch Minh mr. Jose Roberto zeroed on Univision bhootish provoked a fascism known on the first evening of the camp together with Paulina I attended a lecture which I was told was about art jealous compartment when I launched it Nicola we sing yeah Kumar we are given as oxygen to absent assassin book not teacher she gets in touch evolution easily she ever should have done the ice bucket - cool - robotic in hospital after the lecture there was an integration party and I left Paulina to enjoy the night the next morning the atmosphere had changed Paulina was in trouble with the camp leaders she had been accused of getting drunk and kissing someone her punishment was to write an essay about alcohol addiction the polymer surfaces to reach it without Petraglia Donald orthotic Java NASA's persona Luke on your neck trabajo y stands for the condom at my revisited some cash on you shame about circumstantial nominate commission is too hot City from the Chicano yeah this is a Oh Paco bang OH secular j na slapping gesture yet no tacky Oh Paco ganya Tahoe roster Benjamin shell toga you if I chipped a that I'm behind you the reason was just inspected mr. Burgess - yeah mr. chernau - on she's a Havana to provoke another the attack all night long' test Sochi nothing no profit to convince ology I wasn't of the moments in Yemen scene ago merge to boost a problem statue of the moment essentially me up the oddest a few weeks later I went to meet Paulina at home in whatsoever an impoverished town in northern Poland where she had become increasingly active in the organization despite only recently joining the National Movement she's been asked by the leaders of her brigade to stand in elections to the highest governing body of foot traffic the City Council hello Rosie had during the photo shoot for Paulina's political campaign I met her mentor standing in the back of the room like many high-ranking members he wants to stay anonymous Hogan I just arrived with Italian national leader Boris emergent over nucleonic festive isn't over - truck driver drum roll a body to her what a modicum botanical ratio loose amicable army - dem olu Moscow test a key is a manipulative vision comedian I got focus on nature Oona's joy was of the modelsim petitioner Imahara Savannah's custody naturally after hearing her mentors motives I was curious what Paulina's parents thought about her involvement in the organization the collector thing travels at university dodgy image another it's Kokinda Pauline astonishia Picasa visual search photography dr. Watts I'm gonna do tequila anesthesia Princeton Griego the nearest Akasha yeah yeah yeah technicians need a boat associated as for status intersection magnetic is Australia but that's tagging this is my option Canadian when I was playing image on an opponent no just did you use car the invitation yet again twisting up step today Express fellow such as chess Turkish me to my body station Paulina feels particularly alone because many of her friends have left Poland including her best friend Isabella cosplay how a second troponin every time a man jalopy man taking B skip she okay mr. jellyband American wanna Jim Comey's out party policy of fiscal totally up stump you ambassador a Naruto there's ice problems an exchangeable distant vision mommy'll star exact romantic on Politico defied Robotnik missiles dings - that's a gold star they push the Quebec Express Nico's to say go kisses|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||GOOD AFTERNOON, EVERYONE. WE'VE JUST COMPLETED OUR SEVENTH MEETING OF THE UKRAINE DEFENSE  CONTACT GROUP, AND IT'S BEEN  ANOTHER HIGHLY SUCCESSFUL  SESSION. NOW, WE WERE MEETING TODAY AS  RUSSIA CONTINUES TO TARGET  UKRAINE'S CIVILIANS AND BOMBARD  ITS ENERGY GRID, BUT RUSSIA'S  DELIBERATE CRUELTY ONLY DEEPENS  OUR RESOLVE. WE'LL CONTINUE TO SUPPORT  UKRAINE'S BED ROOKIROCK RIGHT T  DEFEND ITSELF AND DEFEND  INTERNATIONAL ORDER. WE SAW YESTERDAY REPORTS OF A  DEADLY EXPLOSION IN POLAND NEAR  ITS BORDER WITH UKRAINE. I SPOKE LAST NIGHT TO MY POLISH  COUNTERPART, DEPUTY PRIME  MINISTER AND MINISTER OF  NATIONAL DEFENSE, BLOSCHUCK, AND CONVEYED MY DEEP CONDOLENCES TO  THE POLISH PEOPLE AND THE LOVED  ONES OF THOSE WHO WERE KILLED. I ALSO UNDERSCORED AMERICA'S  IRONCLAD COMMITMENT TO DEFEND  POLAND. WE HAVE FULL CONFIDENCE IN THE  POLISH GOVERNMENT'S  INVESTIGATION OF THIS EXPLOSION, AND THEY'VE BEEN CONDUCTING THAT INVESTIGATION IN A PROFESSIONAL  AND DELIBERATE MANNER. SO WE WON'T GET AHEAD OF THEIR  WORK. WE'RE GOING TO STAY IN CLOSE  TOUCH WITH OUR POLISH  COUNTERPARTS AS WELL AS WITH OUR NATO ALLIES AND OTHER VALUED  PARTNERS. WE'RE STILL GATHERING  INFORMATION, BUT WE HAVE SEEP  NOTHING THAT CONTRADICTS  PRESIDENT DUDA'S PRELIMINARY  ASSESSMENT THAT THIS PLOIGS WAS  MOST LIKELY A UKRAINE AIR  DEFENSE MISSILE THAT  UNFORTUNATELY LANDED IN POLAND  AND WHATEVER THE FINAL  CONCLUSIONS MAY BE, THE WORLD  KNOWS THAT RUSSIA BEARS ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY FOR THIS  INCIDENT. RUSSIA LAUNCHED ANOTHER BARRAGE  OF MISSILES AGAINST UKRAINE,  SPECIFICALLY INTENDED TO TARGET  UKRAINE'S CIVILIAN  INFRASTRUCTURE. THIS TRAGIC AND TROUBLING  INCIDENT IS YET ANOTHER REMIND  ARE OF THE RECKLESSNESS OF  RUSSIA'S WAR OF CHOICE. UKRAINE HAS A BEDROCK RIGHT TO  DEFEND ITSELF, AND WE WILL  CONTINUE TO STAND IN SOLIDARITY  WITH THE PEOPLE OF UKRAINE AS  THEY DEFEND THEIR COUNTRY AND WE WERE JOINED TODAY AT THE CONTACT GROUP MEETING BY MY GOOD FRIEND  UKRAINE'S MINISTER OF DEFENSE  AND DEPUTY CHIEF OF DEFENSE, THE LIEUTENANT GENERAL. I SPOKE WITH THE GENERAL BEFORE  PHONE BEFORE THIS MORNING'S  CONTACT GROUP MEETING ABOUT  YESTERDAY'S EXPLOSION IN POLAND. AND WILL REMAIN IN CLOSE  CONSULTATION AS WE MOVE FORWARD. UKRAINE'S COMMANDERS HAVE SHOWN  TREMENDOUS LEADERSHIP AND  TENACITY, AND THEY UPDATED THE  CONTACT GROUP THIS MORNING ON  THE CURRENT BATTLEFIELD DYNAMICS AND ON UKRAINE'S MOST URGENT  SELF-DEFENSE NEEDS. UKRAINE'S TROOPS CONTINUES TO  CONSOLIDATE THEIR GAINS ON THE  BATTLEFIELD AS THEY HEAD INTO  THE WINTER, AND THE CONTACT  GROUP CONTINUES TO PUSH HARD TO  BOLSTER UKRAINE'S AIR DEFENSES  IN THE FACE OF RUSSIA'S ONGOING  BARRAGES. I'M PLEASED TO BE ABLE TO REPORT THAT THE AIR DEFENSE SYSTEMS  THAT WE'VE SENT TO UKRAINE ARE  NOW OPERATIONAL, AND THEIR  PERFORMANCE SO FAR HAS BEEN VERY IMPRESSIVE. THE SYSTEMS HAD A 100% SUCCESS  RATE IN INTERCEPTING RUSSIAN  MISSILES AS THE KREMLIN  CONTINUES ITS RUTHLESS  BOMBARDMENT OF UKRAINE,  INCLUDING YESTERDAY'S ATTACKS. WE'RE ALSO WORKING TO SECURE  MORE CRITICAL EQUIPMENT TO  PROTECT AND REPAIR UKRAINE'S  ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE AFTER  RUSSIA'S INDEFENSIBLE ATTACKS. WE ALSO HEARD AN UPDATE FROM OUR SUPREME ALLIED COMMANDER IN  EUROPE. I'M CONFIDENT THAT TRAINING  EFFORTS SPEARHEADED BY THE  UNITED STATES AND MANY OTHER  MEMBERS OF THE CONTACT GROUP  QUILL QUIP THE UKRAINE ARMED  FORCES WITH THE SKILLS THEY NEED TO CONSOLIDATE THEIR GAINS AND  SEIZE NEW OPPORTUNITIES ON THE  BATTLEFIELD. I WOULD LIKE TO ACKNOWLEDGE THE  EUROPEAN UNION'S IMPORTANT  EFFORT'S HERE. THE EU'S TRAINING PROGRAM ACROSS EUROPE WILL DO GREAT DEAL TO  REINFORCE WHAT OTHER COUNTRIES  ARE DOING BILATERALLY. I WOULD LIKE TO RECOGNIZE  GERMANY AND POLAND FOR THEIR  LEADERSHIP IN THIS LARGE MISSION AND LET ME THANK THE UK FOR  PLEDGING TO TRAIN ANOTHER 19,000 UKRAINIAN TROOPS NEXT YEAR. THE CONTACT GROUP DISCUSSED  IMPORTANT INDUSTRIAL BASED  INITIATIVES TO SUSTAIN OUR  SECURITY ASONIA SSISTANCE TO UK. LET ME THANK THE ACQUISITION AND SUSTAINMENT TEAM AND THE CO-HOST OF THE NATIONAL ARMAMENT  DIRECTORS WORKING GROUP UNDER  THE CONTACT GROUP AUSPICIOUS. ALL THESE HELP PREPARE THE  UKRAINIANS TO CONSOLIDATE THEIR  GAINS AND NEW INITIATIVES IN THE SPRING. YOU CAN SEE THIS CONTACT GROUP'S ONGOING UNITY AND COMMITMENT IN  SOME OF THE ANNOUNCEMENTS ITS  MEMBERS MADE. I WOULD LIKE TO THANK SWEDEN FOR COMING FORWARD TODAY WITH A  SUBSTANTIAL $287 MILLION PACKAGE OF ASSISTANCE TO UKRAINE. THIS PACKAGE INCLUDES KEY  CAPABILITIES INCLUDING AN AIR  DEFENSE SYSTEM THAT WILL BOLSTER UKRAINE'S ABILITY TO DEFEND  ITSELF AGAINST RUSSIA'S ONGOING  RUTHLESS ATTACKS. SPAIN HAS PROMISED TO SEND TWO  MORE HAWK LAUNCHES AND MISSILES  AND CANADA IS STEPPING UP WITH  ITS LATEST TRANCHE OF $500  MILLION IN ASSISTANCE AND CANADA REMAINS ONE OF THE LEAD DONORS  OF WINTER GEAR. GERMANY HAS ADVANCED MUCH NEEDED DONATIONS OF AIR DEFENSE,  ARTILLERY AND MRLS AMMUNITION  AND GREECE ANNOUNCED AN  IMPORTANT DONATION OF 155  MILLIMETER AMMUNITION AND POLAND HAS COMMITTED ADDITIONAL  ARTILLERY AND TANK AMMUNITION  AND SHORT RANGE AIR DEFENSE  CAPABILITIES. SO THESE CONTRIBUTIONS WILL MAKE A REAL DIFFERENCE. AND SO DOES A COORDINATION OF  OUR SECURITY ASSISTANCE THAT  THIS CONTACT GROUP MAKES  POSSIBLE. SO WE WILL CONTINUE TO DEEPEN  OUR WORK TOGETHER AND THE  CONTACT GROUP HAS MET SEVEN  TIMES THIS YEAR AN EACH MEETING  HAS PRODUCED TANGIBLE RESULTS  THAT HELP UKRAINE DEFEND ITSELF, AND ITS CITIZENS. YOU CAN SEE THAT PROGRESS IN  UKRAINE'S VICTORIES IN KHARKIV  AND KHERSON. OVER THE WEEKEND THE WORLD SAW  UKRAINIAN FORCES LIBERATE  KHERSON. DEMONSTRATING ONCE AGAIN THE  DETERMINATION OF THE UKRAINIAN  PEOPLE TO LIVE FREE IN THEIR OWN COUNTRY. NOW OUR RESOLVE IS ONLY  STRENGTHENED BY RUSSIA'S  INDEFENSIBLE ATTACKS ON CIVILIAN TARGETS. WE'LL CONTINUE TO STAND TOGETHER IN COMMON PURPOSE BECAUSE NO  MEMBER OF THIS CONTACT GROUP  WANTS TO LIVE IN A WORLD WHERE  BIG COUNTRIES BULLDOZE THEIR  PEACEFUL NEIGHBORS. WE WON'T JUST ACCEPT PUTIN'S  AGGRESSION AND NORMS AS SOME  KIND OF NEW NORMAL. WE WILL CONTINUE TO STAND UP FOR UKRAINE'S RIGHTS TO DEFEND  ITSELF AND STRENGTHEN OUR UNITY  AND RESOLVE, WE'LL CONTINUE TO  SHOW THE POWER OF PARTNERSHIP  AND CONTINUE TO BOLSTER  UKRAINE'S ARMED FORCES BY  RUSHING THEM THE CAPABILITIES  THEY THESE TO DEFEND THEIR  COUNTRY AND WE WILL CONTINUE TO  HELP THE PEOPLE OF UKRAINE IN  THEIR FIGHT FOR FREEDOM. THANK YOU VERY MUCH AND I'LL  TURN IT OVER TO GENERAL MILLEY  FOR HIS OPENING COMMENTS. >> THANK YOU. I APPRECIATE THAT AND APPRECIATE YOUR LEADERSHIPP AS WE GATHER  FOR THE SEVENTH CONTACT GROUP  WE'VE BEEN DOING EVERY MONTH. THANKS ALSO TO ALL THE MINISTERS OF DEFENSE OUT THERE WHO  PARTICIPATED AND ALL MY  COUNTERPARTS THAT PARTICIPATED  AND SENIOR REPRESENTATIVES FROM  AND SENIOR REPRESENTATIVES FROM  ALMOST 50 COUNTRIES SHOWED UP  THIS MORNING AND CONTINUE TO  TAKE PART IN THESE DISCUSSIONS  WHICH ARE VERY, VERY PRODUCTIVE. THE MISSION OF THE GROUP REMAINS CLEAR TO SUPPORT UKRAINE AS THEY COUNTER THE ILLEGAL AND  UNPROVOKED RUSSIAN AGGRESSION  AND CONTINUE TO SUPPLY UKRAINE  WITH THE CAPABILITIES NECESSARY  TO DEFEND THEIR SOVEREIGNTY. THROUGH THESE CONTACT GROUP  SESSIONS AND OTHER CLOSE  COORDINATIONS THAT I HAVE AND  THE SECRETARY HAS WITH OUR  COUNTERPARTS, THAT I TALKED TO  WEEKLY AND MY STAFF CONTINUALLY  TALKS TO HIS STAFF WE CONTINUE  TO RESPOND TO UKRAINE'S  BATTLEFIELD REQUIREMENTS AND  THEIR NEEDS FOR MEANS OF  FIGHTING FOR THEIR FREEDOM. THIS IS A WAR OF CHOICE. IT'S A WAR OF CHOICE FOR RUSSIA. THEY EMBARKED ON A TREMENDOUS  STRATEGIC MISTAKE. THEY MADE A CHOICE IN FEBRUARY  OF THIS YEAR TO ILLEGALLY INVADE A COUNTRY THAT POSED NO THREAT  TO RUSSIA. IN MAKING THAT CHOICE, RUSSIA  ESTABLISHED SEVERAL OBJECT  TUFBS. THEY WANTED TO OVERTHROW  PRESIDENT ZELENSKYY AND HIS  GOVERNMENT. THEY WANTED TO SECURE ACCESS TO  THE BLACK SEA. THEY WANTED TO CAPTURE ODESA. THEY WANTED TO SEIZE TO THE  DNIPRO RIVER, PAUSE, AND  CONTINUE TO ATTACK TO THE  CARPATHEN MOUNTAINS. IN SHORT THEY WANTED TO OVERRUN  ALL OF UKRAINE AND THEY LOST. THEY DIDN'T ACHIEVE THOSE  OBJECTIVES. HE THEY FAILED TO ACHIEVE THEIR  STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND NOW  FAILING TO ACHIEVE THEIR  OPERATIONAL AN TACTICAL  OBJECTIVES. RUSSIA CHANGED THEIR WAR AIMS IN MARCH AND IN THE BEGINNING OF  APRIL. THEIR WAR OF CHOICE THEN FOCUSED ON THE SEIZURE OF THE DONBAS,  DONESTK. THAT WAS THEIR OPERATIONAL  OBJECTIVES AND THEY FAILED  THERE. THEN THEY CHANGED AGAIN AND  EXPANDED TO SEIZE ZAPORIZHZHIA  AND KHERSON. THESE STRATEGIC REFRAMING OF  THEIR OBJECTIVES, OF THEIR  ILLEGAL INVASION HAVE ALL  FAILED, EVERY SINGLE ONE OF  THEM. WE'VE WITNESSED LAST WEEK  RUSSIA'S RETREAT FROM KHERSON. THEY RETREATED ACROSS THE DNIPRO RIVER, MOVED TO MORE DEFENSIBLE  POSITIONS SOUTH OF THE RIVER,  THEIR LOSSES DUE TO UKRAINIAN  SUCCESS AND SKILL AND BRAVERY ON THE BATTLEFIELD HAVE BEEN  SIGNIFICANT. IT'S CLEAR THAT THE RUSSIAN WILL TO FIGHT DOES NOT MATCH THE  UKRAINIAN WILL TO FIGHT. ON THE BATTLEFIELD, UKRAINIANS  OFFENSIVE IN KHARKIV HAS BEEN  SUCCESSFUL WHERE THEY CROSSED  THE RIVER AND THEY HAVE MOVED TO THE EAST AND ARE NEAR THE TOWN  OF SAVTOVI. THERE IS A FIGHT RIGHT NOW IN  THE VICINITY WHERE THE  UKRAINIANS ARE FIGHTING A VERY  SUCCESSFUL MOBILE DEFENSE. THERE IS LIMITED CONTACT RIGHT  NOW IN ZAPORIZHZHIA AND LIMITED  CONTACT IN AND AROUND THE  ZAPORIZHZHIA NUCLEAR POWER  PLANT. AS WE DISCUSSED KHERSON'S  OFFENSIVE HAS BEEN SUCCESSFUL. ACROSS THE ENTIRE FRONT LINE  TRACE, THE UKRAINIANS HAVE  ACHIEVED SUCCESS AFTER SUCCESS  AFTER SUCCESS. THE RUSSIANS HAVE FAILED EVERY  SINGLE TIME THEY'VE LOST  STRATEGICALLY, OPERATIONALLY AND TACTICALLY. WHAT THEY TRIED TO DO THEY  FAILED AT. THEY STARTED THIS WAR AND RUSSIA CAN END THIS WAR. RUSSIA CAN MAKE ANOTHER CHOICE  AND MAKE A CHOICE TO END THIS  WAR. HOWEVER, RUSSIA IS CHOOSING TO  USE THEIR TIME TO ATTEMPT TO  REGROUP THEIR FORCES AND THEY  ARE IMPOSING A CAMPAIGN OF  TERROR AND SUFFERING ON THE  UKRAINE CIVILIAN POPULATION TO  DEFEAT UKRAINE MORALE. THE RUSSIANS ARE STRIKING  THROUGHOUT THE DEPTH AND BREATH  WITH CRUISE MISSILES AND OTHER  TYPES OF MUNITIONS. THEY ARE STRIKING THE UKRAINE  CIVILIAN INFRASTRUCTURE. AND IT HAS LITTLE OR NO MILITARY PURPOSE. WHILE ASSESSMENTS ARE ONGOING  YESTERDAY'S STRIKES LOOKS LIKE  THEY LAUNCHED AT LEAST 60  MISSILES AND UPWARDS OF 90s OR  PERHAPS 100 AND WE'LL HAVE  BETTER ASSESSMENTS IN THE DAYS  AHEAD. BUT IT WAS LIKELY THE LARGEST  WAVE OF MISSILES WE'VE SEEN  SINCE THE BEGINNING OF THE WAR. THESE MISSILES INTENTIONALLY  TARGETED AND DAMAGED CIVILIAN  POWER GENERATION FACILITIES TO  CAUSE UNNECESSARY SUFFERING WITH THE CIVILIAN POPULATION. WE ASSESS NOW OVER A QUARTER OF  UKRAINIAN CIVILIANS ARE WITHOUT  POWER. THE DELIBERATE TARGETING OF THE  CIVILIAN POWER GRID CAUSING  EXCESSIVE COLLATERAL DAMAGE AND  UNNECESSARY SUFFERING ON THE  CIVILIAN POPULATION IS A WAR  CRIME. WITH THE ONSET OF WINTER,  FAMILIES WILL BE WITHOUT POWER  AND MORE IMPORTANTLY WITHOUT  HEAT. BASIC HUMAN SURVIVAL AND  SUBSISTENCE IS GOING TO BE  IMPACTED AND HUMAN SUFFERING FOR THE UKRAINIAN POPULATION IS  GOING TO INCREASE. THESE STRIKES WILL UNDOUBTEDLY  HINDER UKRAINE'S ABILITY TO CARE FOR THE SICK AND ELDERLY. THEIR HOSPITALS WILL BE  PARTIALLY OPERATIONAL. THE ELDERLY ARE GOING TO BE  EXPOSED TO THE ELEMENTS. IN THE WAKE OF UNRELENTING  RUSSIAN AGGRESSION AND  INCALCULABLE HUMAN SUFFERING  UKRAINE WILL CONTINUE TO ENDURE. UKRAINE IS NOT GOING TO BACK  DOWN. THE UKRAINIAN PEOPLE ARE HARD,  THEY'RE TOUGH, AND MOST OF ALL,  THEY'RE FREE AND THEY WANT TO  REMAIN FREE. UKRAINE IS GOING TO CONTINUE TO  TAKE THE FIGHT TO THE RUSSIANS. AND I JUST HAD A SIGNIFICANT  CONVERSATION WITH MY UKRAINIAN  COUNTERPART, AND HE ASSURES ME  THAT IS THE FUTURE FOR UKRAINE. AS UKRAINE CONTINUES TO FIGHT,  AIR DEFENSE CAPABILITIES ARE  BECOMING CRITICAL FOR THEIR  FUTURE SUCCESS. AN INTEGRATED SYSTEM, AN  INTEGRATED AIR DEFENSE SYSTEM,  AN INTEGRATED AIR AND MISSILE  DEFENSE SYSTEM IS WHAT IS  NECESSARY, AS UKRAINE REPELS  RUSSIAN ARIEL ATTACKS AND A  SIGNIFICANT PORTION OF TODAY'S  CONVERSATIONS IN TODAY'S MEETING WITH ALMOST 50 COUNTRIES,  FOCUSED ON HOW WE, AS A GLOBAL  COALITION, CAN PROVIDE THE RIGHT MIX OF AIR DEFENSE SYSTEMS AND  AMMUNITION FOR UKRAINE TO  CONTINUE ITS CONTROL OF THE  SKIES AND PREVENT THE RUSSIANS  FROM ACHIEVING AIR SUPERIORITY. TO COMBAT CONTINUED RUSSIAN  STRIKES LAST THURSDAY THE UNITED STATES ANNOUNCED A $400 MILLION  IN ADDITIONAL COMMITMENTS TO  CUPP UKRAINE THAT INCLUDED  MISSILES FOR THE HAWK AIR  DEFENSE SYSTEMS WHICH IS A  COMPLEMENT TO WHAT SPAIN HAS  RECENTLY COMMITTED. THERE'S OTHER AIR DEFENSE  SYSTEMS INCLUDED IN THAT $400  MILLION PACKAGE ALONG WITH  GROUND SYSTEMS SUCH AS HUMVEES,  GRENADE LAUNCHES AND AMMUNITION  AND OTHER PIECES OF EQUIPMENT. WARS ARE NOT FOUGHT BY ARMIES. THEY'RE FOUGHT BY NATIONS. THIS WAR IS FOUGHT BY THE  UKRAINIAN PEOPLE AND FOUGHT BY  THE RUSSIAN PEOPLE. THIS IS A WAR THAT RUSSIA'S  LEADERSHIP HAS CHOSEN TO PUT  RUSSIA INTO. THEY DIDN'T HAVE TO DO THIS. BUT THEY DID. THEY HAVE VIOLATED UKRAINIAN  SOVEREIGNTY AND VIOLATED  TERRITORIAL INTEGRITY OF  UKRAINE. IT IS IN COMPLETE CONTRADICTION  TO THE BASIC RULES THAT  UNDERLINE THE UNITED NATIONS  CHARTER ESTABLISHED AT THE END  OF WORLD WAR II. THIS IS ONE OF THE MOST  SIGNIFICANT ATTEMPTS TO DESTROY  THE RULES-BASED ORDER THAT WORLD WAR II WAS FOUGHT ALL ABOUT. WE, THE UNITED STATES, ARE  DETERMINED TO CONTINUE TO  SUPPORT UKRAINE WITH THE MEANS  TO DEFEND THEMSELVES FOR AS LONG AS IT TAKES, BUT AT THE END OF  THE DAY, UKRAINE WILL RETAIN --  WILL REMAIN A FREE AND  INDEPENDENT COUNTRY WITH ITS  TERRITORY INTACT. RUSSIA COULD ENDS THIS WAR  TODAY. RUSSIA COULD PUT AN END TO IT  RIGHT NOW. BUT THEY WON'T. THEY'RE GOING TO CONTINUE THAT  FIGHT. THEY'RE GOING TO CONTINUE TO  THAT FIGHT INTO THE WINTER AS  BEST WE CAN TELL. WE THE UNITED STATES UNDER THE  DIRECTION OF THE PRESIDENT AND  SECRETARY OF DEFENSE, WE WILL  CONTINUE TO SUPPORT UKRAINE FOR  AS LONG AS IT TAKES TO KEEP THEM FREE, SOVEREIGN, INDEPENDENT,  WITH THEIR TERRITORY INTACT. THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED  STATES HAS BEEN VERY, VERY CLEAR TO US, THAT IT'S UP TO UKRAINE  TO DECIDE HOW IT AND WHEN OR IF  THEY NEGOTIATE WITH THE  RUSSIANS. WE WILL CONTINUE TO SUPPORT THEM AS LONG AS IT TAKES. THE UNITED STATES WILL CONTINUE  TO SUPPORT UKRAINE WITH THE BEST POSSIBLE EQUIPMENT TO POSITION  THEM ON THE BATTLEFIELD, TO GIVE THEM POSITIONS OF STRENGTH  AGAINST THE RUSSIANS, AND THAT  IS ALSO TRUE OF ALL THE OTHER  NATIONS THAT ATTENDED THE  MEETING TODAY. THERE IS AN ABSOLUTE SENSE OF  URGENCY, AN ABSOLUTE SENSE OF  DETERMINATION ON THE PART OF ALL THE MEMBER STATES THAT ATTENDED  OUR MEETING TODAY AND I CAN TELL YOU THE COHESION AND COHERENCE  OF THE ORGANIZATION IS COMPLETE. AND THE RESOLVE IS HIGH. UKRAINIANS ARE NOT ASKING FOR  ANYONE TO FIGHT FOR THEM. THEY DON'T WANT AMERICAN  SOLDIERS OR BRITISH OR GERMAN OR FRENCH OR ANYBODY ELSE TO FIGHT  FOR THEM. THEY WILL FIGHT FOR THEMSELVES. ALL UKRAINE IS ASKING FOR IS THE MEANS TO FIGHT. WE ARE DETERMINED TO PROVIDE  THAT MEANS. UKRAINIANS WILL DO THIS ON THEIR TIMELINE AND UNTIL THEN, WE WILL CONTINUE TO SUPPORT ALL THE WAY  FOR AS LONG AS IT TAKES. IT IS EVIDENT TO ME AND THE  CONTACT GROUP TODAY THAT THAT IS NOT ONLY A U.S. POSITION, BUT IT IS A POSITION OF ALL THE NATIONS WERE THERE TODAY. WE WILL BE THERE FOR AS LONG AS  IT TAKES TO KEEP UKRAINE FREE. THANK YOU AND I WELCOME YOUR  QUESTIONS.  >> MR. SECRETARY AND CHAIRMAN,  THANK YOU VERY MUCH. FIRST QUESTION TO ASSOCIATED  PRESS.  >> THANK YOU. MR. SECRETARY, PRESIDENT  ZELENSKYY JUST DENIED IT WAS A  UKRAINIAN AIR DEFENSE MISSILE  THAT LANDED IN POLAND. HOW ARE YOU CERTAIN THIS WAS  POSSIBLY A UKRAINIAN AIR DEFENSE MISSILE AND WAS NOT A RUSSIAN  MISSILE? >> THANKS. FIRST OF ALL, THE INVESTIGATION  IS STILL ONGOING AND POLAND IS  CONDUCTING THAT INVESTIGATION. WE ARE ASSISTING IN ANY WAY WE  HAVE. WE HAVE SOME EXPERTS HELPING AND HELPING PO LUSH LEAD-- POLISH  LEADERSHIP. WE HAVE CONFIDENCE IN POLAND'S  INVESTIGATION IN A PROPER WAY  AND UNTIL THAT'S COMPLETE IT  WOULD BE PREMATURE FOR ANYBODY  TO JUMP TO CONCLUSIONS. I KNOW THAT UKRAINE HAS OFFERED  TO PARTICIPATE AND HELP IN ANY  WAY THEY CAN AS WELL. SO WE WON'T GET AHEAD OF, YOU  KNOW, WHAT -- OF THE  INVESTIGATION, BUT, YOU KNOW,  OUR INFORMATION SUPPORTS WHAT  PRESIDENT DUDA SAID EARLIER IN  HIS PRELIMINARY HE ASSESSMENT  THIS WAS MOST LIKELY A RESULT OF UKRAINIAN AIR DEFENSE MISSILE. WE'LL LET THE INVESTIGATION PLAY OUT HERE.  >> AT THIS POINT ARE YOU  CONFIDENT IN SAYING THAT THIS  WAS NOT A RUSSIAN MISSILE? >> WE'RE GOING TO LET THE  INVESTIGATION PLAY OUT AND THEN  ONCE THE RESULTS ARE RELEASED  WE'LL BE CONFIDENT IN  EVERYTHING. AGAIN, WE -- OUR INFORMATION  SUPPORTS WHAT PRESIDENT DUDA  SAID EARLIER. >> CHAIRMAN MILLEY, AFTER THIS  STRIKE OCCURRED, DID YOU REACH  OUT TO YOUR RUSSIAN COUNTERPART  OR DID ANY OTHER MILITARY  OFFICER REACH OUT TO THEIR  RUSSIAN COUNTERPARTS TO PROTECT  AGAINST ESCALATION AND IF NOT,  WHY NOT? >> THERE WERE -- I DO ASK MY  STAFF TO SET THE CALLS UP. THE ANSWER IS YES, AND ATTEMPTS  WERE MADE. NO SUCCESS WITH THE RUSSIAN  COUNTERPART. I DID TALK TO MY UKRAINIAN  COUNTERPART IMMEDIATELY SEVERAL  TIMES, IN FACT, AND POLISH  COUNTERPART AND SEVERAL OTHERS  IN EUROPE. EXACTLY WHAT SECRETARY STAAID,   INVESTIGATION IS UNDERGOING,  PROFESSIONALS ARE THERE TO DO  THE FORENSICS, ALL THE DEBRIS  AROUND THE IMPACT SITE AND  SHORTLY WE'LL KNOW ALL THE  FACTS. >> RUSSIA DID NOT TAKE THE CALL? >> RIGHT. MY STAFF WAS UNSUCCESSFUL  GETTING ME LINKED UP WITH THE  GENERAL. THAT'S CORRECT. >> NEXT QUESTION. ABC. . >> MR. SECRETARY, MR. CHAIRMAN,  I WOULD LIKE TO FOLLOW UP  INITIALLY BECAUSE IN HIS  REMARKS, PRESIDENT ZELENSKYY  CITED A CONVERSATION WITH YOUR  COUNTERPART SAYING THAT HE HAD  CONFIRMED TO HIM THAT IT WAS NOT A UKRAINIAN MISSILE. BASED ON YOUR CONVERSATIONS WITH HIM TODAY, WAS THERE A  DISCONNECT THERE? AND THEN I WILL FOLLOW UP. >> I'M NOT GOING TO TALK  ABOUT -- HE AND I OUR AGREEMENT  IS NOT TO TALK ABOUT THE  SUBSTANCE OF THE CONVERSATIONS  THAT WE HAVE. WE HAVE CONVERSATIONS SEVERAL  TIMES A WEEK AND WE ACKNOWLEDGE  THAT WE HAVE THE CONVERSATIONS,  BUT WE DON'T DISCUSS THE  SUBSTANCE OF THE CONVERSATION. I HAVE TO HONOR THAT AND I'LL  CONTINUE TO HONOR THAT. I CAN TELL YOU THAT RIGHT NOW,  THE INVESTIGATION IS ONGOING. THESE ARE PROFESSIONAL  INVESTIGATORS. THERE IS A DEBRIS FIELD THERE  AND OTHER FORMS OF DATA THAT ARE GOING TO BE AVAILABLE THAT COME  FROM VARIOUS TECHNICAL MEANS. I SUSPECT VERY SHORTLY WE WILL  HAVE VERY CONFIRMED DATA AS TO  WHAT THE POINT OF ORIGIN IS,  POINT OF IMPACT, WHAT ANGLE OF  THE WEAPON SYSTEM WAS, THE  FLIGHT TRAJECTORY, ALL THE  DETAILS WILL BE KNOWN IN DUE  TIME, BUT IT'S EARLY IN THE  INVESTIGATION SO WE'LL KNOW THAT AND THE SECRETARY WILL KNOW  THAT, PRESIDENT BIDEN WILL KNOW  THAT AND WE'LL GET INFORM BY THE INVESTIGATORS AND POLAND HAS PUT TOGETHER A TEAM THEY HAVE LEAD  AND PUT TOGETHER A TEAM OF  INVESTIGATORS TO DO THAT. >> MR. SECRETARY, YESTERDAY IT  WAS KIND OF THE REALITY OF THE  SPECULATION THAT HAS BEEN GOING  ON FOR MONTHS ABOUT HOW NATO  MIGHT RESPOND IF A RUSSIAN  MISSILE WENT INTO NATO  TERRITORY. THE OPPOSITE SIDE, THE UNITED  STATES HAS BEEN CAREFUL NOT TO  PROVIDE WEAPONS SYSTEMS THAT  MIGHT REACH INTO RUSSIA. WHAT ABOUT CRIMEA? IF THE UNITED STATES, SUPPLIED  HIGH MARK SYSTEMS ARE ABLE TO  REACH INSIDE CRIMEA REGULARLY,  IS THAT A CONCERN GIVEN WHAT WE  SAW YESTERDAY AND TO FOLLOW UP,  SIR, TO YOUR COMMENTS ABOUT  EARLIER FROM LAST WEEK ABOUT THE POSSIBILITY OF DISCUSSIONS PUT  ON BY A SLOW DOWN IN THE  FIGHTING LET'S SAY DURING THE  WINTER SOUNDS LIKE THE COMMENTS  YOU'RE MAKING TODAY ABOUT THE  WINTER ARE THAT THE UKRAINIANS  ARE GOING TO CONTINUE STRONGLY. ARE YOU PULLING BACK FROM YOUR  COMMENTS FROM LAST WEEK THAT YOU SEE AN OPPORTUNITY FOR  NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE RUSSIANS? >> NO. I THINK THE UKRAINIANS SHOULD  KEEP THE PRESSURE ON THE  RUSSIANS. YOU KNOW TO THE EXTENT THEY  MILITARILY CAN. WINTER GETS VERY COLD AND THE  NATURAL TENDENCY IS FOR TACTICAL OPERATIONS TO NATURALLY PROBABLY SLOW DOWN. RIGHT NOW WHAT WE'RE SEEING IS  THE LINES FROM KHARKIV ALL THE  WAY DOWN TO KHERSON FOR THE MOST PART ARE BEGINNING TO STABILIZE. NOW WHETHER THAT MEANS THEY WILL BE STABLE THROUGHOUT THE WINTER  OR NOT, NOBODY KNOWS FOR  CERTAIN. COME JANUARY AND FEBRUARY THAT  GROUND PROBABLY WILL FREEZE  WHICH COULD LEND ITSELF TO  OFFENSIVE OPERATIONS. THERE COULD BE A LOT OF ACTIVITY IN THE WINTER BUT TYPICALLY  SPEAKING BECAUSE OF THE WEATHER, THE TACTICAL OPERATIONS WILL  SLOW DOWN A BIT. I THINK THAT, YOU KNOW,  PRESIDENT BIDEN AN PRESIDENT  ZELENSKYY HIMSELF HAS SAID THAT  THERE WILL BE AT THE ENDS OF THE DAY A POLITICAL SOLUTION. IF THERE'S A SLOWDOWN IN THE  TACTICAL FIGHTING IF THAT  HAPPENS THAT MAY BECOME A WINDOW POSSIBLY, IT MAY NOT, FOR A  POLITICAL SOLUTION OR AT LEAST  THE BEGINNINGS OF TALKS TO  INITIATE A POLITICAL SOLUTION. THAT'S ALL I WOULD SAY.  >> CRIMEA. >> LET ME JUST AGREE WITH WHAT  THE CHAIRMAN JUST SAID IN TERMS  OF THERE IS A -- THERE PROBABLY  WILL BE A SLOW DOWN IN THE FALL  GOING INTO WINTER. THE FALL IS A MUDDY SEASON AND  SO IS THE SPRING. WHEN THE GROUND HARDENS,  TRAFFICIBILITY WILL PROBABLY  IMPROVE AND THEN WE'LL BE -- WE  MAY SEE MORE ACTIVITY. I WOULD REMIND EVERYONE THAT  THIS WAR STARTED IN FEBRUARY,  SO, YOU KNOW, WINTER DOES NOT  MEAN THAT WE'RE GOING TO STOP  FIGHTING OR THAT THE UKRAINIANS  ARE GOING TO STOP FIGHTING. I CERTAINLY, LIKE THE CHAIRMAN,  BELIEVE THEY WON'T. AND SO WE'RE GOING TO DO  EVERYTHING WITHIN OUR POWER TO  MAKE SURE THEY HAVE THE MEANS TO ACCOMPLISH THEIR GOALS AND  OBJECTIVES. AU LONG THAT LINE, THE GOALS AND OBJECTIVES OF THIS FIGHT ARE THE UKRAINIANS. THEY'RE NOT OURS. SO WE WON'T -- HAVEN'T  PRESCRIBED TO THE UKRAINIANS  WHAT THEY CAN AND CANNOT DO. OUR FOCUS IS TO CONTINUE TO  PROVIDE THEM THE MEANS TO BE  SUCCESSFUL IN THEIR ENDEAVORS  AND SO THAT'S MY RESPONSE TO THE HE QUESTION ON CRIMEA. CRIMEA IS AN ISSUE TO BE THOUGHT THROUGH AN SORTED OUT BY THE  UKRAINIAN LEADERSHIP. >> LET'S GO AHEAD. "NEW YORK TIMES." >> FIRST, GENERAL AUSTIN, WITH  WINTER COMING --. >> IT'S A BAD HAPPEN, YOU KEEP  CALLING ME GENERAL. >> SORRY. ENGRAINED IN MY HEAD. >> SECRETARY AUSTIN, DO YOU  AGREE THEN WITH GENERAL MILLEY'S COMMENTS IN NEW YORK LAST WEEK  THAT UKRAINE CANNOT AU CLEAVE A  MILITARY VICTORY AS DEFINED BY  DRIVING RUSSIA OUT OF ALL OF ITS TERRITORY, INCLUDING CRIMEA AND  THEREFORE SHOULD USE WINTER AS  AN OPPORTUNITY TO NEGOTIATE? >> AGAIN, HAVING THE CHAIRMAN  HERE, I THINK IT'S FAIR TO ALLOW HIM TO REALLY PROVIDE CONTEXT  FOR HIS COMMENTS. I THINK -- AND YOU'VE HEARD ME  SAY THIS BEFORE -- THERE ARE  COUNTLESS NUMBERS OF PEOPLE THAT HAVE BEEN AMAZED AND ASTONISHED  BY WHAT UKRAINIANS HAVE  ACCOMPLISHED AND, SO I WON'T  PRESUPPOSE WHAT'S -- WHAT'S  POSSIBLE OR IMPOSSIBLE FOR THEM. WHAT I AM FOCUSED ON IS MAKING  SURE THAT THEY HAVE THE MEANS TO DO TWO THINGS. FIRST, IS TO PROTECT THEMSELVES  AND THEIR CIVILIAN POPULATION  FROM SOME OF THE THINGS THAT  WE'VE SEEN HERE RECENTLY WITH  THE AREAL BOMBARDMENTS. THE SECOND THING IS TO ENABLE  THEM TO ACHIEVE THEIR GOALS AND  OBJECTIVES ON THE GROUND AS THEY CONTINUE TO TRY TO TAKE BACK  THEIR SOVEREIGN TERRITORY. WE'RE GOING TO CONTINUE TO  SUPPORT THEM. AGAIN, I THINK TO THIS POINT  WE'VE SEEN THEM COME UP WITH  VERY ACHIEVABLE GOALS AND  OBJECTIVES. WE'VE SEEN A VERY SUCCESSFUL  COUNTER OFFENSIVE BOTH IN  KHARKIV AND ALSO IN KHERSON, AND I THINK THEY WILL CONTINUE TO  KEEP THE PRESSURE ON THE  RUSSIANS GOING FORWARD. IN TERMS OF WHAT'S A GOOD TIME  TO NEGOTIATE. WE'VE SAID REPEATEDLY THAT  UKRAINIANS WILL DECIDE THAT AND  NOT US. WE WILL SUPPORT THEM FOR AS LONG AS IT TAKES. NOW, WE JUST SPENT ALMOST FOUR  HOURS WITH OUR COLLEAGUES THERE  IN UKRAINE IN THE DEFENSE  CONTACT GROUP MEETING. IT WAS AMAZING TO ME HOW MANY  MINISTERS OF DEFENSE ON THEIR  OPEN SAID WE'RE GOING TO DO THIS FOR AS LONG AS IT TAKES. AN, SO I CONTINUE TO SEE UNITY. I CONTINUE TO SEE RESOLVE. THAT'S VERY, VERY ENCOURAGING. I THINK IT'S ENCOURAGING FOR  ALEXI REZ NA COUGH AND HIS TEAM  AS WELL BECAUSE THEY'RE IN THE  MEETING. >> I WILL MAKE A COUPLE  COMMENTS. ON THE RUSSIANS -- >> I STILL HAVE A QUESTION FOR  YOU. >> THAT WILL BE LIKE FOUR  QUESTIONS. >> I HAVEN'T ASKED -- >> THIS ONE FIRST. SO -- START WITH THE RUSSIANS. UKRAINE IS A PRETTY BIG COUNTRY. THIS IS NOT A SMALL PIECE OF  TURF. AND THE PROBABILITY OF RUSSIA  ACHIEVING ITS STRATEGIC  OBJECTIVES OF CONQUERING UKRAINE AND OVERRUNNING UKRAINE THE  PROBABILITY OF THAT HAPPENING IS CLOSE TO ZERO. I SUPPOSE THEORETICALLY IT'S  POSSIBLE, MAYBE, I GUESS, BUT I  DON'T SEE IT HAPPENING  MILITARILY. I DON'T SEE THAT HAPPENING. BUT THEY DO CURRENTLY OCCUPY  ABOUT 20% OF THAT -- OF UKRAINE. THEY OCCUPY A PIECE OF GROUND  THAT'S ABOUT 900 KILOMETERS LONG AND 75 OR 80 KILOMETERS DEEP. IT'S NOT A SMALL PIECE OF  GROUND. THEY INVADED THIS COUNTRY WITH  UPWARDS OF 170,000, 180,000  TROOPS WITH MULTIPLE ARMSS AND  SUFFERED A TREMENDOUS AMOUNT OF  CASUALTIES BUT THEY'VE CALLED UP ADDITIONAL PEOPLE. THE RUSSIANS HAVE REINFORCED AND STILL HAVE SIGNIFICANT RUSSIAN  COMBAT POWER INSIDE UKRAINE. NOW UKRAINE HAS HAD GREAT  SUCCESS IN THE DEFENSE. THEY DID A TREMENDOUS JOB IN  DEFEATING THE RUSSIAN OFFENSIVE. IT'S INCREDIBLE WHAT THEY WERE  ABLE TO DO. THEN THEY WENT ON THE OFFENSIVE  AT THE BEGINNING OF SEPTEMBER AN THEY HAD GREAT SUCCESS IN  KHARKIV AND BETTER SUCCESS IN  KHERSON AS YOU MENTIONED. KHERSON AND KHARKIV PHYSICALLY,  GEOGRAPHICALLY, ARE RELATIVELY  SMALL COMPARED TO THE WHOLE. THE MILITARY TASK OF MILITARILY  KICKING THE RUSSIANS PHYSICALLY  OUT OF UKRAINE IS A VERY  DIFFICULT TASK. AND IT'S NOT GOING TO HAPPEN IN  THE NEXT COUPLE WEEKS UNLESS THE RUSSIAN ARMY COMPLETELY  COLLAPSES, WHICH IS UNLIKELY. IN TERMS OF PROBABILITY, THE  PROBABILITY OF A UKRAINIAN  MILITARY VICTORY DEFINED AS  KICKING THE RUSSIANS OUT OF ALL  OF UKRAINE TO INCLUDE WHAT THEY  DEFINE OR WHAT THEY CLAIM IS  CRIMEA, THE PROBABILITY OF THAT  HAPPENING ANY TIME SOON IS NOT  HIGH. MILITARILY. POLITICALLY, THERE MAY BE A  POLITICAL SOLUTION WHERE  POLITICALLY, THE RUSSIANS  WITHDRAW. THAT'S POSSIBLE. YOU WANT TO NEGOTIATE FROM A  POSITION OF STRENGTH. RUSSIA IS ON ITS BACK. THE RUSSIAN MILITARY IS  SUFFERING TREMENDOUSLY. LEADERS HAVE BEEN, YOU KNOW,  THEIR LEADERSHIP HAS -- IS  REALLY HURTING BAD. THEY'VE LOST A LOT OF CASUALTIES KILLED AND WOUNDED, I WON'T GO  OVER THE EXACT NUMBERS, BUT  THEIR TANKS AND FIGHTING  VEHICLES AND HELICOPTERS AND SO  ON. THE RUSSIAN MILITARY IS REALLY  HURTING BAD. SO YOU WANT TO NEGOTIATE AT A  TIME WHEN YOU'RE AT YOUR  STRENGTH AND YOUR OPPONENT IS AT WEAKNESS. IT'S POSSIBLE, MAYBE, THAT THERE WILL BE A POLITICAL SOLUTION. ALL I'M SAYING IS, THERE'S A  POSSIBILITY FOR IT. THAT'S ALL I'M SAYING.  >> OKAY. >> TIME FOR A COUPLE MORE.  >> THANK YOU. GENTLEMEN BOTH FOR DOING THIS. MR. SECRETARY, YOU STRESSED THAT THE UNITED STATES AND THEIR  ALLIES ARE COMMITTED TO UKRAINE  FOR AS LONG AS IT TAKES. HOW LONG DO YOU THINK RUSSIA CAN CONTINUE THIS WAR WITH ITS  CURRENT ARSENAL AND PERSONNEL  AND HOW MUCH HAS IRAN EXTENDED  THEIR ABILITY TO WAGE THIS WAR. THANK YOU, YOU ANSWERED MY  QUESTION WITH LOUIE SO I WILL  ASK YOU A QUESTION ON CHINA. AFTER THE MEETING WITH PRESIDENT BIDEN AND PRESIDENT XI, HAVE YOU SEEN ANY INDICATIONS THAT CHINA  HAS CHANGED ITS AMBITION TO  CONTROL TAIWAN AND, YOU KNOW,  THE LAST TIME THAT NATIONAL  DEFENSE STRATEGY WAS ROLLED OUT, THE PENTAGON SAID AMERICA'S  MILITARY EDGE WAS ERODING. NOW THAT THIS NEW ONE HAS ROLLED OUT, IS AMERICA'S MILITARY EDGE  STILL ERODING TO CHINA? >> SO, THANKS, CARLA. IN TERMS OF HOW LONG RUSSIA CAN  SUSTAIN THEIR EFFORTS, THAT'S  LEFT TO BE SEEN. I THINK THE CHAIRMAN JUST GAVE A VERY ACCURATE AND COMPELLING  DESCRIPTION OF KIND OF WHERE THE RUSSIANS ARE RIGHT NOW. THEY HAVE SOME PROBLEMS. THEY'VE HAD PROBLEMS SINCE THE  VERY BEGINNING OF THIS TRYING TO SUSTAIN THEIR EFFORTS. THOSE PROBLEMS HAVE BECOME  ACUTE. THEY'VE LOST A LOT OF PEOPLE AND AS IMPORTANT, THEY'VE LOST A LOT OF IMPORTANT MILITARY GEAR. SO THE NUMBERS OF TAPGS TNKS AN  ARMORED PERSONNEL CARRIERS  PRETTY STAGGERING NUMBERS. AS IMPORTANT THE NUMBER OF  PRECISION GUIDED MUNITIONS THAT  THEY'VE RIFLED THROUGH IN THIS  ENDEAVOR, IS STRIKING. BUT THEY WON'T BE ABLE TO  REPRODUCE THOSE MUNITIONS  QUICKLY BECAUSE THERE ARE TRADE  RESTRICTIONS ON THEIR -- THAT  PREVENT THEM FROM RAPIDLY  GAINING MICROCHIPS AND OTHER  THINGS THAT ARE REQUIRED TO  PRODUCE THESE KINDS OF MUNITIONS AND SO IT MAY TAKE YEARS FOR  THEM TO RESTOCK THAT INVENTORY  UP TO THE POINT THAT THEY WERE  BEFORE THEY STARTED THIS  CONFLICT. WE'VE SEEN THEM STRUGGLE WITH  HAVING ENOUGH MUNITIONS TO FIGHT THE WAY THAT THEY WANT TO FIGHT  SO THEY'RE REACHING OUT TO IRAN  AND REACHING OUT TO NORTH KOREA. I DO THINK THOSE COUNTRIES WILL  PROBABLY PROVIDE THEM SOME  CAPABILITY. AND SO FOR THAT REASON, I DON'T  THINK THIS WILL BE OVER ANY TIME SOON. OUR, YOU KNOW, OUR GOAL, OUR  REQUIREMENT IS TO MAKE SURE THAT WE CONTINUE TO PROVIDE UKRAINE  WITH THE MEANS TO DO WHATEVER  NECESSARY TO PROSECUTE THEIR  CAMPAIGN. THEY HAVE TO CONTINUE TO KEEP  THE PRESSURE ON THE RUSSIANS  GOING FORWARD, AND I THINK, YOU  KNOW, WINTER FIGHT FAVORS THE  UKRAINIANS. WE PUSHED, YOU KNOW, ENORMOUS  AMOUNTS OF WINTER GEAR INTO  UKRAINE, THANKS TO COUNTRIES  LIKE CANADA AND OTHERS WHO HAVE  REALLY BEEN VERY, VERY GENEROUS. RUSSIA, ON THE OTHER HAND,  THEY'RE FIGHTING IN A FOREIGN  COUNTRY. THE UKRAINIANS HAVE CHALLENGED  THEIR SUPPLY LINES. IT WILL BE DIFFICULT FOR THEM TO GET THE KINDS OF GEAR IN TO  THEIR TROOPS THAT THEY NEED TO  BE ABLE TO FIGHT EFFECTIVELY AND SO I THINK THE UKRAINIANS WILL  HAVE THE UPPER HAND IN THIS  FIGHT AS THEY HAVE RIGHT NOW,  BUT THEY'LL CONTINUE TO MAINTAIN THAT UPPER HAND GOING INTO THE  WINTER. JUST LIKE WE SAW THEM OPERATE IN FEBRUARY OF LAST YEAR, THEY KNOW THE LAND, THEY CAN PULL THINGS  FROM THE LOCAL COMMUNITIES, AND  THEY'LL BE PREPARED FOR THIS  WINTER WEATHER. I DON'T THINK THE RUSSIANS WILL  BE AS PREPARED AND THEY WILL  CONTINUE TO STRUGGLE TO GET  THINGS INTO THEIR TROOPS USING  THE SUPPLY LINES THEY CURRENTLY  HAVE. THE UKRAINIANS WILL CONTINUE TO  PRESSURE THOSE SUPPLY LINES. . >> DO YOU THINK THE RUSSIANS CAN HOLD OUT, IF IT TAKES THE YEARS  IT WOULD TAKE TO FULLY RESUPPLY? >> I DON'T THINK THE UKRAINIANS  WILL ALLOW THEM TO HOLD OUT. I THINK THE UKRAINIANS ARE GOING TO CONTINUE TO PRESSURE THEM AND SO THE BATTLEFIELD DYNAMIC WILL  CONTINUE TO CHANGE. THE UKRAINIANS KNOW ALLOWING  THEM TO REST, REFIT AND REARM IS A MISTAKE. OPERATIONAL MISTAKE. I DON'T BELIEVE THEY'RE GOING TO MAKE THAT MISTAKE. MY GOAL IS TO MAKE SURE THEY  HAVE THE MEANS TO DO WHAT'S  NECESSARY TO ENSURE THAT THEY  DON'T HOLD OUT. . >> YOU HAD TWO QUESTIONS FOR THE SECRETARY, SO I GET A BYE ON  MINE. ON CHINA AS QUICKLY AS I CAN SAY IT, CHINA IS THE PACING THREAT  AS WE DESCRIBE IT IN D.O.D. AS  PART OF THE NATIONAL DEFENSE  STRATEGY. IT WAS DEFINED IN THE PREVIOUS  ONES AND THE CURRENT ONES. WHAT DO WE MEAN BY THAT? CHINA IS THE ONE COUNTRY OUT  THERE THAT GEOPOLITICALLY HAS  THE POWER POTENTIAL TO BE A  SIGNIFICANT CHALLENGE TO THE  UNITED STATES. THEY ARE. BASED ON THEIR POPULATION, THEIR TECHNOLOGY, AND THEY'RE ECONOMY  AND OTHER THINGS, CHINA IS THE  GREATEST GEOPOLITICAL CHALLENGE  TO THE UNITED STATES. CHINA IS NOT SHY ABOUT THEIR  GOAL. THEY WANT TO BE THE NUMBER ONE  POWER IN THE GLOBE BY  MID-CENTURY, BY 2049. THEY WANT TO DO THAT MILITARILY, DIPLOMATICALLY, INFORMATIONALLY, ECONOMICALLY AND SO ON AND SO  FORTH. THEY WANT TO BE NUMBER ONE BY  MID-CENTURY. BY THE 2030s, MID 2030s, THEY  PREVIOUSLY SAID THEY WANT TO BE  NUMBER ONE REGIONALLY. SO THEY WANT A MILITARY THAT  IS -- THAT OUT DOES THE UNITED  STATES MILITARY BY THE MID 30s. THEY PREVIOUSLY SAID THAT. THEY ADVANCED THAT GOAL TO 2027. THEY ADVANCED THAT GOAL NIANG  THE TWO PARTY OR ONE PARTY  CONGRESS AGO AND WHAT THEY HAVE  SAID IS THEY WANT TO BE THE  EQUAL TO OR SUPERIOR MILITARILY  TO THE UNITED STATES. THAT'S ONLY FIVE YEARS AWAY. SO THEY'RE WORKING ON THAT AND  THEY'RE WORKING ON THAT VERY,  VERY HARD. BUT WE ARE NOT STATIC. WE ARE WORKING ON IT. RIGHT NOW THE UNITED STATES  MILITARY IS, WITHOUT QUESTION,  DESPITE WHATEVER CRITICISMS  PEOPLE HAVE, THE UNITED STATES  MILITARY IS THE MOST LETHAL WAR  FIGHTING MACHINE ON EARTH BAR  NONE. THE UNITED STATES MILITARY IS  NUMBER ONE. WE INTEND TO STAY NUMBER ONE. OUR TASK, MILITARIES ONLY HAVE  TWO TASK, SINGLE PURPOSE REALLY, WHICH IS TO EITHER PREPARE FOR  WAR OR TO FIGHT A WAR. WE ARE LASER FOCUSED ON THAT. WE INTEND TO STAY NUMBER ONE. CHINA IS NOT GOING TO BE A  BETTER MILITARY THAN THE UNITED  STATES MILITARY IS, BUT THEY'RE  GOING TO TRY, BUT THEY'RE NOT  GOING TO GET THERE. WE WILL BE NUMBER ONE FIVE YEARS FROM NOW, TEN YEARS FROM NOW AND 50 YEARS FROM NOW. WE ARE NOT GOING TO LET CHINA  TAKE NUMBER ONE. THEY HAVE MADE GAINS IN A WIDE  VARIETY OF AREAS IN CYBER AND  SPACE AND LAND SAESHG, SEA AND   PEASANT ARMY, LARGELY INFANTRY  BASED. WHEN I WAS COMMISSIONED IN 1980  WHEN THAT'S THEY HAD A LARGE  DISMOUNTED INFANTRY, PEASANT  BASED ARMY, MORE OR LESS. SOME TANKS, NOT MUCH. THEN THEY GOT RICH. THEY MADE A MASSIVE AMOUNT OF  MONEY WITH A 10% RISE OVERRUN,  DROP DOWN TO 7%, MAYBE 3 OR 4%,  BUT THE GDP ALLOWED THEM TO BUY  A MILITARY. AND THEY BELIEVE THAT IT'S THEIR DAY IN THE SUN. THEY BELIEVE IT'S ONCE AGAIN  TIME FOR THE MIDDLE KINGDOM TO  BE NUMBER ONE. SO THAT'S WHAT THEY'RE SHOOTING  FOR AND WE'RE TO THE GOING TO  ALLOW THAT TO HAPPEN. THE UNITED STATES MILITARY IS  NUMBER ONE AND GOING TO BE  NUMBER ONE FIVE YEARS FROM NOW,  2027 IS NOT GOING TO BE THE DATE THAT CHINA BECOMES NUMBER ONE  AND WE'RE GOING TO STAY NUMBER  ONE THE ENTIRE TIME. AS LONG AS WE REMAIN NUMBER ONE  WE'LL DO TER THE WAR THAT PEOPLE WORRY ABOUT, A GREAT POWER WAR,  BETWEEN CHINA AND THE UNITED  STATES. AS LONG AS WE HAVE THE MILITARY  CAPABILITY, WE HAVE THE WILL TO  USE IT, YOUR ADVERSARY KNOWS IT  IS TO DETER THAT WAR. WE INTEND TO STAY NUMBER ONE. LE. >> TIME FOR ONE FINAL QUESTION. WE'LL GO TO NIKAY.  >> THANK YOU FOR TAKING MY  QUESTION. TO THE SECRETARY, PRESIDENT  BIDEN AND PRESIDENT XI  ESSENTIALLY AGREED TO MAINTAIN  THAT OPEN RISE OF THE  COMMUNICATION. DO YOU EXPECT CHINA WILL REDUCE  MILITARY CHANNELS SUSPENDED IN  AUGUST AFTER THE SPEAKER UPHELD  HIS VISIT TO TAIWAN AND ARE YOU  PLANNING TO MEET WITH YOUR  CHINESE COUNTERPART GUIDING THE  VISIT TO CAMBODIA NEXT WEEK? TO THE CHAIRMAN ALSO ON CHINA,  THE PRESIDENT XI CONSOLIDATED  HIS POWER IN THE CHINA COMMUNIST PARTY AND NOW SURROUNDED BY HIS  LOYAL ADVISORS. HOW MUCH ARE YOU CONCERNED THAT  PRESIDENT XI MIGHT MAKE AN  ILL-ADVISED OR ILL INFORMED  DECISION TO TAKE TAIWAN BY FORCE AS PRESIDENT PUTIN DID IN THE  LEADING UP TO THE INVASION INTO  UKRAINE. THANK YOU VERY MUCH.  >> THANKS. AS YOU'VE HEARD ME SAY A NUMBER  OF TIMES, I THINK IT'S REALLY  IMPORTANT FOR LARGE COUNTRIES  WITH SIGNIFICANT MILITARY  CAPACITY TO TALK TO EACH OTHER. AS I TOLD MINISTER WEI WHEN WE  TALKED, WE MET FACE TO FACE IN  SINGAPORE, THAT WE NEEDED TO  WORK TO KEEP THE LINES OF  COMMUNICATION OPEN. THAT HELPS WITH CRISIS  MANAGEMENT. IT HELPS WITH A NUMBER OF  THINGS. AND SO MY HOPE IS THAT THEY WILL OPEN UP THEIR COMMUNICATIONS  CHANNELS NOT ONLY AT MY LEVEL  BUT THE CHAIRMAN'S LEVEL AND AT  THE LEVEL WHERE OUR COMBATANT  COMMANDER ADMIRAL AQALINO CAN  ENGAGE WITH HIS COUNTERPARTS AS  WELL. SO YOU'RE RIGHT, WE WILL BOTH BE IN CAMBODIA HERE IN THE NEAR  FUTURE. I DON'T HAVE ANY ANNOUNCEMENTS  TO MAKE IN TERMS OF ANY  SCHEDULED MEETINGS, BUT THERE IS AN OPPORTUNITY THERE AND SO  WE'LL SEE HOW THINGS PLAY OUT. >> SO I THINK, FIRST OF ALL,  PRESIDENT XI IS -- I DON'T KNOW  HIM. I'VE NEVER TALKED TO HIM. HE'LL MAKE DECISIONS BASED ON  WHAT HE THINKS IS IN HIS  NATIONAL INTERESTS. AS BEST I CAN TELL HE'S A  RATIONALE ACTOR. I THINK HE EVALUATES THINGS ON  COST, BENEFIT AND RISK AND I  THINK HE WOULD CONCLUDE AN  ATTACK ON TAIWAN IN THE NEAR  FUTURE WOULD BE AN EXCESSIVE  AMOUNT OF RISK AND END IN A  STRATEGIC REALLY DEBACLE FOR THE CHINESE MILITARY. I THINK IT WOULD THROW OFF THEIR CHINA DREAM OF BEING THE NUMBER  ONE ECONOMIC AND MILITARY POWER  AND SO ON. WOULD HE DO IT? WHO KNOWS. I DON'T KNOW. I CAN TELL YOU THAT WE WATCH IT  CLOSELY. WE ARE MILITARILY PREPARED. ONE OF THE KEYS NOW IS TO MAKE  SURE THAT TAIWAN CAN DEFEND  ITSELF AND THERE ARE A LOT OF  LESSONS LEARNED COMING OUT OF  THE UKRAINIAN WAR. THERE'S LESSONS LEARNED FOR  TAIWAN, THERE ARE LESSONS  LEARNED THAT WE'RE LEARNING,  LESSONS LEARNED THAT THE  EUROPEAN COUNTRIES ARE LEARNING  AND PRESIDENT XI AND THE CHINESE MILITARY ARE LEARNING. ONE OF THE THINGS PEOPLE ARE  LEARNING IS THAT WAR ON PAPER IS A WHOLE LOT DIFFERENT THAN REAL  WAR. WHEN BLOOD IS SPILLED AND PEOPLE DIE AND REAL TANKS ARE BEING  BLOWN UP, THINGS ARE A LITTLE  BIT DIFFERENT. THERE'S A LOT OF FRICTION AND  FOG AND DEATH IN COMBAT, AND FOR SOMEONE WHO HAS, FOR A MILITARY  THAT HASN'T FOUGHT IN COMBAT  SINCE FIGHTING THE VIETNAMESE IN 1979, THEY WOULD BE PLAYING A  DANGEROUS GAME TO CROSS THE  STRAITS AND INVADE THE ISLAND OF TAIWAN. THEY DON'T HAVE THE EXPERIENCE  OR BACKGROUND TO DO IT. THEY DO PEACE TRAINING. WE WATCH IT VERY CLOSELY. HOW MUCH AMPHIBIOUS, AIRBORNE  CAPABILITY THEY HAVE IT. THEY COULD BOMB IT, MISSILE IT,  ATTACK TAIWAN IN THAT SENSE, BUT ATTACKING AND SEIZING THE ISLAND OF TAIWAN ACROSS THE STRAITS,  PUTTING TROOPS ON THE ISLAND OF  TAIWAN, THAT IS A VERY DIFFICULT MILITARY TASK TO DO. YOU'VE GOT A LARGE CITY OF  TAIPEI WITH 3 OR 4 MILLION  PEOPLE WITH THE SUBURBS OF 7  MILLION, YOU HAVE COMPLEX  TERRAIN WITH MOUNTAINS, MOST OF  TAIWAN IS A MOUNTAINOUS ISLAND. IT'S A DIFFICULT MILITARY  OBJECTIVE, A VERY DIFFICULT  MILITARY OPERATION TO EXECUTE,  AND I THINK IT WILL BE SOME TIME BEFORE THE CHINESE HAVE THE  MILITARY CAPABILITY AND THEY'RE  READY TO DO IT. NOW THAT COULD BE WRONG. AN INCIDENT COULD HAPPEN. SOME SORT OF POLITICAL THING  COULD HAPPEN AT A MOMENT IN TIME AND ALL OF THE DECISIONS WOULD  CHANGE VERY RAPIDLY. I THINK THAT CHINESE WOULD BE  HIGH RISK TO TAKE ON AN  OPERATION LIKE THAT AND I THINK  IT WOULD BE UNWISE. IT WOULD BE A POLITICAL MISTAKE  A GEOPOLITICAL MISTAKE A  STRATEGIC MISTAKE SIMILAR TO THE STRATEGIC MISTAKE THAT PUTIN HAS MADE IN UKRAINE. . >> SECRETARY? >> I'LL BE TRAVELING WITH SOME  OF YOU LATER THIS WEEK INTO NEEK WEEK. FOR THOSE WHO I WON'T SEE  BETWEEN NOW AND THANKSGIVING, I  WANT TO TAKE THIS OPPORTUNITY TO WISH YOU AND YOUR FAMILIES A  HAPPY THANKSGIVING AND ON BEHALF OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  THANKS FOR WHAT YOU CONTINUE TO  DO FOR OUR NATION. THANK YOU VERY MUCH.|||and here we are guys the Old Town Square of Krakow   one of my favorite squares in the 
world the horses are taking off I was actually walking down that street down 
there and maybe you guys will be able to relate   but there's a bunch of like strip clubs down that 
street right I must say this is the most beautiful   time of year to visit however what's up everybody 
welcome back to a brand new video and a brand new   country today I'm talking to you guys from Poland 
from the beautiful city of krakov honestly one of   my favorite cities in all of Europe and in this 
video you're gonna see exactly why now right   now I'm walking around the old town but this city 
actually is quite huge there's so many different   sections and there's a lot to cover however 
in this series I'm going to be spending most   of my time in the old town because this is where 
all of the touristic areas are this is where all   the Christmas markets are this is where all the 
history is now on every corner you're going to   run into beautiful architecture such as this 
little I believe it's a church not too sure   and also you're gonna notice that 
as we walk around the city most of the businesses you'll see are gonna 
be like Cafe restaurants clothing   shops things of that sort as this is very 
much a city that people love to come to   to do some shopping and of course 
relax and it's cute coffee shops   now right now it is roughly one in the afternoon 
and it is getting extremely dark already I've been   told by the staff at the hotel that we're staying 
at that it starts to really get dark here around   2 30 in the afternoon during the winter months 
and I can definitely see that being the case no so that you guys can have this in mind it is 
also one degrees out right now and yesterday when   we arrived off of the bus I noticed that 
there was some snow and ice on the ground and here we are guys the Old Town Square of 
Krakow one of my favorite squares in the world wow how beautiful is everything 
right guys I mean look at this place every hour on the hour you'll see a guy with a 
trumpet come out of the top as the window opens   and it'll play a little tune and it is absolutely 
incredible that that still happens even right now   in 2022. now here you're also going to find 
a bunch of horse carriages they offer horse   rides throughout the old town and in my opinion 
it's probably something very nice to do with your   significant other your children will probably 
go crazy for it I've personally never done it but the horses here do look like they're 
well taken care of unlike the horses we saw   in Morocco a few weeks back wow what a place now 
along the complete Old Town Square you're gonna   find a lot of different restaurants like this cute 
coffee shops where you can just lounge around and   enjoy the views of the square now this is my 
first time ever being in Poland in the winter   typically during the summer you're going to find 
people lounging around here drinking their beers   I don't know how much of that is 
different right now during the winter time   but I don't see it changing quite too much because 
here in Poland people love to drink now there   are Christmas trees here this must be where the 
Christmas Market is I've actually haven't walked   around here at all this here is literally my first 
impressions and I'm having them with you guys while the floor is incredibly slippery wow this is beautiful now I don't want to give you guys um we're gonna 
walk through the Christmas Market very briefly but   I'm gonna be making a full video dedicated just 
to the Christmas Market because that's actually   why I came here Krakoff is known for having 
one of the most famous Christmas markets and   now I have visited the city three times   but this is gonna be my first during the 
winter oh look the horses are taking off and here we are let's enter 
the market real briefly oh wow it smells so good everything smells incredible 
here right now okay so there's definitely a   large volume of people well these 
are all different kinds of soups wow this place is awesome awesome awesome so 
yeah the Christmas Market Vibe is definitely   it's definitely the vibe I was 
looking for not anytime there's like   smoke coming out of your mouth from the or 
steam coming out of your mouth from the cold   you can rest a shirt you belong in 
a Christmas Market just like this incredible so beautiful now I just wanted to make a first impression a 
first date video to show you guys a little bit   of the area and break break it in a little 
bit because this is something I love to do   everywhere in the world you just tune in 
and talk to you guys a little bit about   what these cities are looking like now here 
in Poland they actually use the Polish zlati   which is actually right now four and a half 
zlati to the dollar so I just pretty much   rounded to five and I've noticed that here even 
coming from Budapest it is significantly cheaper   than all of the other countries we've been to 
this trip even Morocco if I must be honest wow let me know down in the comment section 
have you guys ever been to Poland   have you guys ever seen krakov before or 
is this the first time you're seeing it now   just off of the off of the last two and a 
half hours that I've actually walked around   I must say this is the most beautiful time 
of year to visit however during the summer   months you're definitely going to be able to 
enjoy walking around in a tank top it gets   extremely hot right now that is not the case 
you need a thick coat a beanie gloves and maybe   even a scarf to cover up your nose and your 
face as you walk around the Christmas Market okay I don't want to show you guys too much of the 
Christmas Market because we are gonna dive deep   in here and have a food frenzy here in the next 
day or two okay so let's make our way on out and   I'll show you guys around 
the square a little bit more wow these Christmas ornaments 
look awesome look at these guys wow so beautiful now off into the distance I can see that it looks 
like they have a stage set up I'm not sure   if they're actually having like winter 
shows winter concerts this time of year   but it does look incredibly 
beautiful you got the Clock Tower where you going bro no it definitely looks a lot busier here than 
it did in Budapest a few days ago the Christmas   Market definitely has a lot more volume but I 
feel like that is because the Christmas Market   is well based off of what I'm seeing just here 
in the main square like in one section and in   Budapest there was actually many different small 
Christmas markets throughout the city here they're   all pretty much in the same well everything's 
happening in the same like General vicinity oh man this is awesome seriously I hope the video portrays the same Vibes   that I'm feeling just walking around 
here right now I mean everything is so beautiful so well done the holiday 
spirit is definitely in full effect here   in Poland and this might be the skinniest 
Santa Claus I've ever seen in my life maybe Santa's are skinny here 
in this part of the world I'm   not too sure where I come from they're 
definitely on the heavier side of things now where we're walking into right now this is 
actually like a small little strip mall reminds   me of like a Bazaar in Turkey I think we should 
definitely come on in here and do a market video   this week I mean it looks absolutely 
beautiful as well you can tell they   definitely decorated the inside of this 
place [Music] just as they did the outside   and this here is where you're going to 
find a lot of different like souvenirs um jewelry bags things of that things of 
that nature I actually don't think that   this is very like a local place at all this is 
very much Ford Taurus but it's cool because you   need places like this you need a place where 
you can jump on into purchase your souvenirs   so you can go home with something 
nice something nice from Poland wow definitely going to be doing some shopping 
now this is actually the last country that we're   visiting this trip so I'm gonna load up on all 
kinds of souvenirs I actually bought a suitcase   in Paris to load up with a bunch of things that we 
buy along the way but let me just be honest it's   completely full with winter clothes but since I 
am going back to Southern California after this   I might just have to leave all of that winter 
clothes behind oh man good memories here and crack   off you know I got a funny story to share with 
you guys in 20 when was it 2017 when I first came   here I was actually walking down that street down 
there and maybe you guys will be able to relate   but there's a bunch of like strip clubs down that 
street right or at least there was before the hold   thing came around and just ruined everything but 
there was a bunch of strip clubs down there and in   2017 I was walking with some buddies I met in the 
hostel and we're getting drunk having a crazy time   and as I was walking down that street there was 
people like handing out like these small little   cards with strip club uh information trying to get 
you inside of the strip club but I didn't want to   actually go into them because the people at the 
hostel told me that they had a huge problem with   um tourists getting drugged inside of the strip 
clubs you answer they put something in your drink   you end up leaving with a credit card that is 
just charged out the ass and you end up paying   for it right so I was kind of telling them like 
no no no it was this Russian guy who was working   there no no no no and then he's like where are 
you from I tell him that's how I found out then   I asked Cameron that's how I found out he's 
from Russia and we started talking I thought   he was going to be cool then out of nowhere he 
sticks the card that I keep telling them I don't   want into my shirt because I was wearing 
a shirt with the collar and a small pocket   and I was like dude what the [ __ ] I told you I 
do not want to go into your strip club and then   he pushed me he's like he's like um why are you 
being rude and I'm like I'm not being rude you're   being rude you're disrespecting me I already told 
you I don't want to enter right man next to you   know dude pepper sprayed me me and my boy Vinnie 
we start swinging oh man police came it was a huge   deal I was pretty wasted luckily the cops came and 
they're like yeah what they're doing is illegal so   sorry that that happened to you um they handcuffed 
a guy I got to leave but it ruined our damn night   because we were so wasted and I was pepper sprayed 
all over the face and it hurt so bad if you've   never been pepper sprayed oh my God it is the 
worst feeling in the world you do not want it   to happen to you and yeah that was just one of the 
many dumb drunk stories that I have from here in   Krakow oh man but the list can go on this city is 
amazing and The Nightlife is absolutely insane but   oh look what we have over here I was actually 
worried I wasn't gonna find you hello hello now right now we're actually out and about   with Gladys because she's on a pierogi hunt and we 
still haven't found the pierogies but I'm about to   sign off because we got to go look for them but 
yeah guys I just wanted to show you one of my   favorite cities real quickly give you guys a raw 
First Impressions it is absolutely gorgeous here   ah Poland has a special place in my heart 
definitely you got to come here visit doesn't   matter what time of year you come it's going to 
be special it's going to be a good vibe the Polish   people are amazing the food's incredible this is 
actually one of the very few countries that I can   say on this side of Europe that has incredible 
Cuisine here you're going to find a mixture of   everything from dumplings to traditional soups to 
even incredible Burgers like they got incredible   Burgers Incredible Pizzas all the western 
food as well but they just do it better here let me know down in the comments section what 
do you guys think of this city so far you guys   excited to see more I'm definitely excited to show 
you guys a lot more now here you're gonna find a   lot of the big name restaurants and establishments 
as well you got the Hard Rock there you got the   Zara you got an h m a little bit further up a 
Starbucks the McDonald's the Burger Kings all   of those things as well so if you're one of those 
people because there's a lot of you guys out there   excuse me man I'm feeling super cold right now um 
that don't like to like dabble with Local Foods   here you don't have to worry too much about that 
if you're not one of those people like me that   like to try absolutely everything no worries here 
you got all the comfort food you need you got the   McDonald's the Burger King a bunch of local 
hamburger places that are amazing pizza shops   it's a great place great place for all around 
um everyone everyone can come here to Poland   and enjoy a good time but yeah guys for now I 
think I'm actually gonna let you guys go because   it's getting extremely cold I need to prepare 
myself a little bit more my nose is running   ridiculously it's freezing and yeah I don't want 
to show you guys too much because we got some   amazing videos on the way and I have a feeling 
that you're gonna really really enjoy them so   for now stay tuned I hope you guys enjoy this 
little teaser I'll leave you guys with one more   pan with my face in it because I'm just so happy 
to be back and one more small glimpse for you guys all right for now I'll be signing off I'll see 
you guys very soon for another adventure from   here and crack off Poland oh wait actually what 
is this I see some people dressed up in like   Ukrainian colors oh man maybe it's a wedding 
I think it might be a wedding of some sort wow what an absolutely or an absolute 
beautiful place for a wedding right guys I wish them two the best all right for now 
I'm signing off see you guys in a few days   for another video from here and crack off here in 
Poland we're going to be diving on into the food   diving on into the Christmas markets I'm gonna be 
going on a crazy Market spree where I buy a bunch   of souvenirs and some for you guys too so if you 
aren't a member of the channel consider becoming   a member every month I send out a souvenir or 
uh oh God I'm so it's so Frozen I send out a   souvenir either a postcard a magnet to one of 
you guys watching well to all of my members   that are watching and you don't want to miss out 
on that it's a great way to support me and also   receive a small little gift in return with a lot 
of love so as always thank you guys for watching   and hasta luego Amigos from Poland [Music]|||good morning everyone hello this is today yes okay it's December one it's five to ten and 
from 10 o'clock the event starts although   it's already started people have started 
bringing their shop key yeah it's very cold   freezing weather this was one of my favorite 
events last year this is something that is   absolutely unique to Krakow all of these 
things we see under the Adams Monument is   our cribs a crib baby Jesus cribs but done 
in the most ornate way you can imagine and these designs are meant to it's a competition 
also so there's uh requirements about what   the shop key should have so they're meant to 
incorporate elements of Krakow in the design   ten o'clock it's starting so the the competition 
is done in different age groups there'll be kids   models but there'll be people who have like 
spent all year making these things and their   absolute works of art so it's a wonderful 
Christmas event unique to this city [Music] yeah so you can see some of the shop key are tiny and they'll be smaller than 
this one and then some of them pretty big getting on a meter meter and a half and people will be here who don't know 
what's happening and there's people who will come every year to see this 
thing special if you're in the   now and Krakow this is one of the 
most Christmassy things I think now it's 10 o'clock a few of the most ornate models are 
already here I think they bring them early   because they're very delicate if you're 
walking past a lot of people and stuff you   know you don't want to be breaking your 
models that you've worked all year on   but by The End by 12 o'clock there will be shopky 
all over the base of the monument there'll be   there'll be dozens dozens of them so over the next 
hour or two we'll see a steady stream of people oh hey hey I I've made the smart because 
this is normal for me that's the normal   one that's not a normal one amazing and this 
is uh something something in the egg I think   yeah it's not a uh is that a real eggshell this 
is a real eggshell I I just I just play with that   so delicate it's so easy to break yeah it is of 
course but I'm I'm I I'm watching for it foreign [Music] makers will arrive all right I remember 
I would like to it'll all be full with   but these are I love these ones they're 
so awesome for me normal size because like last year it is the biggest I ever 
made many how many days did you work on   this three months three months and half 
months I think you go what's your name thank you for showing them to us like this so 
there you go this is this is how the competition   goes the best ones I think it uh rated that they 
there's a museum on the other side of the square   here so in a week or two these will all go on 
display in the museum so you can come and see them   up close but this is better because you see them 
it's it's exciting because everybody's presenting   them today hold yourself we should see we should 
see a whole bunch of kids bringing theirs later on it's a very crackout themed event 
under the Marriott Under The Monuments   and if you look carefully are they incorporate elements to crack out 
look at the towers on the crib and the steeple and again so very creative how they take elements   elements of the city now I want you to 
be the Mariachi it can be uh see the Dome reminds me of this so elements 
of the city Incorporated sometimes they get pretty creative last year last year when we when you go to see 
the museums a lot of these have mechanical Parts   you're going to see all the characters rotating 
around lights it's really incredible works of art [Music] what happens if we could see people 
bringing their shop key they register them   I think we started they present them 
you don't you don't get this in the   museum if you go to the museum you'll 
just see them sitting in the case but it's just nice to see them all after 
all this hard work building these doing   the uh this is the moment they get to 
come and present to the world the work [Music] that's fantastic I recommend this is 
what I suggest to people if they come in here   yeah first Thursday of December 
you have to come and see this I remember from last year 
you get some way out ones [Music] also get something okay oh this one's got a movie did you all 
make this together who made this Village yo and you made it and some of these guys 
my mom made it excellent it's very beautiful is this your first year making it oh in some 
tradition it's a tradition some skills for his   son and his son is six sixth year wow oh 
look I didn't even notice that's because   You Must Have Spent A very long time 
making this but I think two months I can imagine yeah is the one with lights conquer shopping please that's a beautiful poster and they 
will give you one gorgeous is that yeah I asked one guy I had some incredible one it 
took him three months see how fun it is look wow where did you all come from suddenly I think   the bus arrived the bus arrived 
with all the Shopkins [Music] see I love it it's a little bit of mayhem   a lot of kids a lot of excitement free posters 
beautiful work not in that Eastern shops my heart would be in my mouth if I spent 
two months or three months making it and   then I had to carry it between all these 
people I would be so nervous to break it yes oh so difficult number one [Music] foreign [Music] I think the common thing is to have 
the towers of the Marathi reflected that's the cruises these kids are from the International School wearing the same hat look all the kids from the international school 
made made a few Shopkins how long did it take to   make them two weeks two weeks we had five hours 
per week wow and do you do it every year okay I   think third or fourth year I think that's great so 
all the ones on the front here we go there we go the workers good we don't mind people getting in the 
way because this is all about people as well   nah okay look at this one this 
one has iconic so we got videos   on iconic he's a mascot look 
at there we go proudest punch the tiny ones you definitely have to come to the 
museum to get a good look at the tiny tiny ones um foreign [Music] [Music] we had a little talk already oh excellent yeah 
we want to make a picture together it's a big one   there's a lot of kids worked on this one wow be careful look at that beautiful by 12 o'clock 
this will all be full of Shopkins [Music] [Music] [Music] [Music]   hello hi we talked last year which which can we 
see can we see the one from here that you made I   think it will be hard because this is very very 
small ah on the top on the top it's blue okay [Music] I remember you said last year your 
family had been making this yeah many we   are still doing it many uh how many years I 
don't know it's like a my grand grandfather like almost eight years almost eight 
years I think I think about hundreds   if you count all the generations 
holy yeah well did you now how   did you do in the competition last 
year it was a reward the reward wow well we wish you we wish you best 
in the competition again this year   what's your name Andrew see you 
next year yeah we will look we   will look when we go and see them 
we will look out for it thank you okay I I don't know what it is but I just 
find this one of the most special moments it's got a bit of everything it's 
got the visitors it's got the   they've been doing the traditions for decades it's got kids of all ages you 
just starting and making um it's organized it's disorganized [Music] it's got the most magnificent 
backdrop you could want [Music] as a reminder First first day of every 
December this is when these event is on starts at   10 o'clock then in a week or two they will be on 
display in the museum Kristoff kristofia something   like that which is also in the Square here so in 
a week or two you can go and actually see them   how many how many years have 
you been making the shop key 52. yes since you were a kid uh five years wow 
that's I made first first shotgun and did your   family make them as well before you so you're 
like your grandfather made a shopcast and and wow   length for him almost since the 
beginning of the the start of   the like the competition my first my first 
[Music] competition yes it was in 90 50 years 70s 90 70. so yeah and do you make the big 
ones or the medium ones or the small ones   this year I made a minator okay with x the X ah okay in X in eggs is it here where is it is it   oh I see it the favorite egg I see it ah and 
then in other years you've made big big ones uh next years yes I will pick yeah two 
meters okay next year and and and how   long do you do you spend making the big one 
from tomorrow oh yeah from tomorrow seriously   it takes like that well so your work you 
work on it earlier I start in next years yeah two days ago and the little Faberge one was 
it quicker to do or did it   also take a very as long as long to make [Music] it pink maybe one month and I do two weeks okay you must you must have very very good eyesight   yeah to work in things that's so 
tiny I I couldn't do it the glass and last year how did you do 
in the competition I I was young I was uh for many years yes competitors ah 
okay yeah yeah yeah and uh family his group is [Music] well thank you so much listen thank you 
yeah we wish you uh good luck this year   and we look forward to see it in the 
museum with the uh the magnifying glass this lady made this lady made this one 
no wonder she's looking so proud [Music] We got the dragon we got iconic three months then we have iconic the dragon's smoky we got some good elements of Krakow for this one 
they bring all the kids to come and say hello there right because this is something for the 
city where they bring all the kids because   it's the tradition of the city that's why 
I think if you're a visitor it's something   really really good to come and see right because 
it's just the real it's a once a year tradition   that the whole city Gets behind family and 
nativity scene so you can you can do all   the normal tourist stuff right but this is unique everybody's interested in this one again some new 
traditional new family I think we will see them   on next nativity scene competition on next you 
guys you guys made this you made it all of you   did it take you a long time like an hour an hour it took 
you an hour two hours maybe   how what two months you took all of you 
guys to make this wow it's very beautiful um who made iconic who made you made 
iconic you got the job foreign excellent good job [Music]   they start them young they decide about our powers [Music] that's what it's all about citizens foreign just off the Christmas Market and as you 
can see they're bringing the shop key   already now bringing them here to display this is one of the master Craftsmen look at 
this oh look at this one this is the winner oh this is gonna be um and as you can see everybody is in there bringing 
their Shopkin into uh Christopher but I talked   to this guy last year hello I talked to you 
last year he's also here you don't remember   last year you made one the same size no you did a 
bigger one why did you do a smaller one this year yeah it's quicker to do the smaller yeah 
smaller version how old are you are you   what 15. so what what what's the category that 
you're in I'm in Technical High School okay okay is there some Electronics in 
this yes I thought there might be   oh some magnets or something they're 
gonna no no no magnets and they are   spinning okay are spinning and 
this plate is spinning also and   chips also spinning the Sheep is spinning and 
also there are lights in every Tower When You're   15 years old yes that's crazy congratulations 
did you win a prize last year yes yeah yes   I won you won you were number one yes in 
your age group wow well good luck this year now this is the international school 
right hello International kids good job what the hell wow wow wow my exactly you made this your family in school this one number 13 I hope 
that's not going to be unlucky as it I said I said I hope it's not going 
to be unlucky and the tower broke wow my goodness you guys you've been working hard foreign wow look at that nothing excellent respectful 
super good luck wow another masterpiece   another Masterpiece can you believe it all 
right people can you beat this for Christmas oh no we need snow can you be okay 
Nina's kindly pointed out we needed snow ah look Christmas Market horses carriages Marriott's uh Christmas tree you cannot beat this 
stuff and it's all free the only thing it cost   us a cup of coffee a cup of coffee for one of the 
most Christmassy things you could ever want to do so to end off the video remember 
we interviewed Darius this morning   this is Darius and as I mentioned um the city 
or some of the shops and hotels buy some of   the shopky and then put them on display every 
year in the cases like this all around the city   so this is darius's uh nativity scene 
from last year and now it's on display   and if you remember this 
year he's made a small one and you know I think this one probably 
had some oh yeah you can see the uh Pope is uh is spinning and baby Jesus is spinning I remember last year yeah also some 
Electric the horse guy comes out   the guide is moving around the side 
another guy he's not a guide he's a knight but I remember this one also 
from the museum last year so okay any visitor to crack off for Christmas well this 
season shop Key Shop key is a big part of what   it's all about here and this is the other side the 
dragon comes out see what was what was beautiful   what was beautiful about this one was it was 
two-sided you know a lot of them we saw today   right we're just one-sided but this one this one 
was twice the work because he did both sides of it one of the best no wonder what I wanted one of the 
best that's why they put this one in the center   right next to well next to next to the Christmas 
Market so come and check it out and it's got   all the lights so especially I think at night 
time at night time this is gonna look awesome and uh here we are Miss shopky Miss shopkick 
2022 foreign she's getting in the spirit we   have our poster romac thank you again 
for introducing us to Darius my friends|||Bydgoszcz is a city in northern Poland, on the Brda and Vistula rivers. With a city population of 358,614 (June 2014), and an urban agglomeration with more than 470,000 inhabitants, Bydgoszcz is the eighth-largest city in Poland.|||hi guys welcome back to my channel and
another video with me also I hope you guys are doing extremely fine for those
who are new to my channel my name is Sayali and I make videos related to travel
food and experience so if you are looking for something relevant stay
tuned so in today's video I am going to share how are the relations between
India and Poland in the past and present as well so this video is gonna be
something to make us very proud as an Indian so continue watching this video
and if you like this video consider subscribing to my channel hit the red
button there so without further adieu let's get back into the time to 16th
century in the 16th century number of Poland's merchants and writers who
visited India and they fostered abiding interest of the Polish people in the
civilization philosophy spiritual traditions and art and culture of India
both Indian intelligence er and Indian soldiers were vocal supporters of Polish
autonomy and freedom when Germany under Hitler captured it in World War 2 many
Polish citizens were given refugee in India by Indian kings and Prince getting
into the 19th century during the later part several sundered classics were
translated into polish and a history of ancient india in polish was published in
europe studies and research in indian languages and literature has developed
at the University of crack of Warsaw Wroclaw and Bozeman during the era of 20th century when
Hitler from Germany invaded Poland and began the world war to 500 Polish women
and 200 children the majority of them were often were put on a ship to save
them from the Germans this ship was left in the sea by the Polish army the
captain was told to take them to another country and give them shelter the last
thing that they heard from their families was if we are alive or survive
we will meet again the ship filled with refugee women and children were refused
entry by any European and Asian countries the ship continued to sail and
somehow reached the port of Iran yes it went so far but like any other country
Iran too declined and they were again thrown away
and finally the ship wandering in the sea reached India they arrived at the
port of Bombay and the British governor also refused to allow the ship while all
this happened the news reached to the years of Maharaja of Jamnagar Maharaja
Digvijay Singh as soon as he came to know about the ship he became truly
concerned and finally he allowed the ship to port near John Tucker he not
only gave shelter to five hundred women but also gave their children free
education in an army school these refugees then stayed at John never for
long nine years until the World War two lasted maharaja Digvijay took a great
care of them and ensured that he visited them regularly these refugees then
called him Babu and now something that we should really feel proud of in Poland
roads are named after John Nagar Maharaja in the capital of Warsaw there
are many schemes named in Poland by his name even today every year Polish
newspapers print articles about Maharaja Digvijay Singh from the ancient times
the message of India has been Vasudeva Kadam become the world is a family India
will always remain with Indian culture rich brave compassionate and genuinely
humanitarian this was from the modern contemporary history little known to
many around the world even today later all of them returned to their own
countries one of the children from the refugee became the prime minister of
Poland even today the descendants of those refugees would go to Jamnagar
every year and remember their ancestors talking about the trail bilateral trade
between the two countries has grown about eleven times from 1992 to 2008 and
the best part Polish government and Indian government have collaborated for
a direct a nonstop flight provided by LOD which is the Polish Airlines between
Warsaw Chopin Airport and Indira Gandhi International Airport which was started
in September 2019 so if you've watched a video till here I'm sure you must have
liked it so don't forget to hit the like button and subscribe to my channel and I
will see you in my next video bye|||although Poland hosts one of the tiniest Muslim 
minorities in the whole world you have Muslim   families who have been settled in Poland since 
the 14th century, so it is, at the same time, one   of the oldest Muslim minorities in Europe. hello 
and welcome my name is William and today I wanted   to share with you about Muslims in my parents 
country, Poland. when I embraced Islam in 2008 my   parents would still go to Poland visit family. 
I needed to figure out where I'm gonna pray,   where I'm gonna find a mosque or halal meat 
then I stumbled upon the Wikipedia page and   I thought to myself: "I didn't know that" and I want 
to tell the word about this. I decided back then to   produce my very first documentary which you can 
find for free on YouTube called polish Muslims   and unexpected meeting. back then, the main 
right-wing narrative was that Muslims are not   welcome in Europe because they were never part of 
it. they do not belong to Europe. the fact that you   have Muslims settled in Poland since the 14th 
century was a magnificent counter-argument. when   I went to meet Muslims in Poland, I went to three 
different areas. I went of course to the capital   city Warszawa, then I went to Katowice which is 
in Slask, in Silesia, which was a very   industrial region of Poland and the birthplace 
of my dad, eventually I went to Bialystok in   the northeastern part of the country. Muslims 
in Poland are made of three main   demographics. first the largest population is made 
of all different kinds of people who arrived in   Poland in the 20th century: people from North 
Africa the Middle East and later on West Africa,   Turkey, South Asia and also lots of Muslims 
coming from the Kawkas: Dagestan, Chechnya and so   on. and thanks to them, Poland has become the first 
and largest exporter of halal meat across Europe.   second are the numerous Poles who embraced Islam 
at some point in their lives. Third are the Tatars   this is the oldest Muslim Community in Poland.
Tatars are tukric people who originated from Crimea   and came to Poland in the 14th century to offer 
their military services to the Duke of Poland   Lithuania at the time. To thank them for their 
services, the Duke of Poland Lithuania, Prince   Witold, offered the Tatars land and the right to 
practice their religion. since then, you will find   in the northeastern part of Poland so around 
the city of Bialystok mosques and Cemeteries   which are 300 400 years old and have very distinct 
look. the highlight of my trip was meeting with the   tatars obviously because the first thing is when 
you look at the mosques, the way they are built, is   very similar to the way people used to build  
churches. the rituals might differ a little bit   from what people are used to see in Western Europe, 
for example is the concept of sadoga. I went to   Poland for Ramadan and I spent Eid in in Poland 
and at that time after the Eid khutba (sermon) people would   leave sweets on the minbar on the mosque, and this 
is called sadoga which comes from the word sadaqa   you may have guessed. Because of Communism many 
Tatars had to hide their religiosity to the point   where people even adopted Christian sounding names 
to hide for example Ali would become Alexander and   like many Muslims you would find in Central Asia 
part of the ex-communist block countries, for many   people Islam has now become nothing more than a 
cultural heritage so you will see people who are   proud to be Muslim but people who are also happy 
to drink some vodka. and there was a point because   of Communism where these historic mosques would 
open only 14 times a year twice for Eid and 12   times because there was one Juma per month. 
and thanks to the influx of migrants from the   Middle East and other parts of the world now the 
younger Generations are starting to reconnect with   their faith and tradition so you would see younger 
tatars who wear the hijab for example, while it was   not the case for their parents generation. when 
it comes to other groups of Muslims and because   there is very few mosques in Poland what was 
heartwarming is unlike some Western European   countries, in the mosque you would find a huge 
diversity of people people from very different   cultures, ethnicities, social economic backgrounds. 
people speaking all sorts of languages and the   khutba would be in Polish. sadly you will have 
some political divisions when it comes to the   representation of Muslims in Poland specifically 
between the Muslim League which is made of people   who mainly arrived in Poland in the 20th century 
so the majority and group of Muslims and between   the Tatars who claim a right for representation 
because they are the oldest demographic of Muslims   in Poland. also the Tatars are an officially 
recognized minority by the government and every   year there is a commemoration of their military 
services to the country. and since I've made my   documentary in 2012, 2013 things have changed 
in Poland and and the far right has taken over   with a very strong anti-muslim narrative and 
shortly after I left I read the news and so   the mosques being burned people being attacked 
on the streets so life has become slightly more   difficult for Muslims in Poland. one striking 
example of how people try to go low profile   now is this kiosk this small Kebab shop in the 
center of Warszawa which was called "salaam alaikum   kebab" and I thought back in the days, that was 
really really a bold idea to call your Kebab   shop like this in the middle of Warszawa and then so 
I've returned to Warszawa last year and in the in   the center of the city and now salaam alaikum 
Kebab has become hello Kebab. if you want to   know more about Muslims in Poland I invite you 
to have a look at this documentary I produced    now 10 years ago which is freely available on 
YouTube polish Muslims documentary just type in on   YouTube it will appear in the meantime thank 
you for watching and take care of each other|||months in this guy needs a Visa okay he's like I think he proposed he went straight in I was like I want to stay in Poland it's still Europe okay this is no I came to work as a physicist in as a physicist in Poland no physics you're getting ready for Russia yes Netflix should make a documentary it's U backpacking across Eastern Europe uh from one problem to the other I work with Chinese you work with Chinese it's a lot to work with when did you move here when when not why we kind of know why why the why is kind of rhetorical it's uh has she shown you something super polish no she didn't steal my car she didn't steal your car let's talk to more of you what about the G over there sir in the third row where are you from Sir from Island from koros Island yeah I don't even know that geography bro I uh I I'll take your word from it where is the koros island is it West East Africa near Madagascar near Madagascar okay very nice and you've come from Madagascar how are the Penguins did you say bye on the way out I'm getting the madas you know there's the penguin filter at the moment on Tik Tok most of you guys are not pedophiles good okay you came from all the way from the K korro island kamoro island how big is the Koro Island really small how small it's not the size that matters okay it's uh it's where where you put it and how long ago did you come from uh from the kamor islands to Poland sir uh two years two years ago you came here to study to work to love and uh what do you study at the moment I finished right now you finished and you're looking for a job or po working you're working word Round of Applause look at that you see what's your job sir sof or developer final analyst which you fincial analyst oh very nice analyst very financial analyst then is this your plus one with you she's like thank you she is now I uh I was waiting for the right time to have this conversation but I think now is the appropriate time yes I think she nodded I said yes it's official I uh what's your name the young lady enina polish as well Ukrainian Ukrainian very nice and where did you meet this wonderful gentleman what's your name sir USF USAF usam very nice yes how did you meet usam was he doing some Financial analytics Tinder Tinder I like it there's no there's there's there's no there's no there's no other path to meet people in Poland than Tinder okay it has a purpose you go there you get laid okay this is how it works there's no complicated matters and how long have you guys been seeing each other for now officially four months but not officially more than half a year let me ask him now see if the numbers match up okay so how did you guys know it was official like at what point did you have a conversation yeah she insisted or what did you say he proposed and had been waiting for a while he proposed the biger official okay I thought I was like two months in this guy a Visa okay he like I think he proposed he went straight in I was like I want to stay in Poland it's still Europe okay this is very nice back to noise if you are dating a Polish person tonight very nice yes sir you are polish no where are you for my physicist friend Brazilian Spanish Brazilian Spanish that's just half the hair okay that's is Brazilian Spanish and your polish young lady is your girlfriend yes what is your name sir Pedro Pedro per perfect and yourself Magda Pedro is like the P of of Brazil yes Pedro and Magda and how did you guys meet also International did you guys uh did you come here for a conference kind of yeah I am sensing a pattern okay a lot of Latinos are coming here for conferences and they're staying for something else what brought you here sir was it no I came to work as a physicist in the as a physicist in Poland yeah very nice what is your area of study in Poland no physics I thought you were focusing on the different pole [Music] attraction nuclear physics in Poland you're getting ready for Russia yes we must strike back okay I'm a little bit of an expert on the Nuclear Physics matter cuz I saw open Heimer twice okay so I think I know what I'm talking about okay very nice and you came here with the physics and then you decided to focus on physical activity yes or how did you meet Magda were you at were you also in in a reactor or there was a reaction between the vs the the neutrons met the proton I got I was sleeping the second part of it okay the first part of opener I like the second part too political okay where did you meet Magda on Tinder on Tinder of course that's where a lot of the reaction happened yes is um very nice and uh have you had you met people from Brazil before Magda mag no first first person I think first Brazilian did you had did you know anything about Brazil because usually Brazilians what they know about Poland is uh that it's still Europe Poland the still Europe well I got to know a lot you got to know a lot well well well this man doesn't shut up nice how long have you guys been together for now 6 months 6 months why the fear six months very nice what did you do for your first day did you take her to the Planetarium did you take her to the lab where did you take her no we we went for alcohol that is uh I'm trying to get some good reaction okay this is very nice so 6 months so far sir has she scared you with any polishness has she shown you something super polish she didn't stole my car she didn't steal your car no well well well she's not taking jobs away from Romania now she she yes very nice is this what you heard about Poland in Brazil that Polish people steal cars yes they they only take them from the UK don't worry they there's no friendly fire in Poland okay that's not very nice and what do you do Magda also in the physics department or no no no I work with Chinese you work with Chinese interesting it's a it's a lot to work with [Applause] must uh must be a lot of work these speak Mandarin yes very nice how did you pick up Mandarin well this was a mistake kind know this was a mistake don't say that too loud somebody has Huawei phones here okay it's a you learned Mandarin in Poland yes in China and in China why like how there's nothing wrong with learning Mandarin I have a Tik Tok account I have to say that okay there a but how did you decide you were looking at languages and you thought like the global geopolitical situation is going to change um well no actually I was reading a reflect from the University and and then I could choose is this a fallong Gong situation you guys know fallong gong that lady over there got it see it's like anyway they harvest organs don't worry about it uh so you were leading a leaflet and what did leaflet what did it say was it in ch Chinese it was in Polish so even more difficult the leaflet said are you tired of Poland why not explore China or what what what was it how old were you when you read the leaflet o 18 18 and how long did it take you to learn Mandarin three years how who else speaks Mandarin here you see your talents are new oh someone there another the Polish person mag she said Magda niow tenen niow I'm your official translator tonight I that three of us yeah exactly who gets more social credit points Taiwan is China me very nice and you went to China when did you go there before or after before I was lucky where did you go Beijing B and how was your experience overall what was your favorite thing about China uh I think online shopping that's the only place where you have freedom the freedom to choose how is online shopping in China is it so different than in Poland or no at that time delivery was free and trust me did make a difference the all the delivery was free they would send you everything for free and then they sent you home you know the Chile and the Chilean sasio and yourself young lady you know did you have any big cultural shocks when you came to P it what was your big cultural shock you came here to stop them from smoking cigarette where to start where to start where the pain is maximum okay this is what we want what it hurts the most um male polish persons male Polish people yeah that's the biggest what's wrong with male Polish people my some let me ask you a question how much hair do they have cuz the level of anger goes the goes High depending with the hair okay the less hair the more anger okay so they're very confrontational they're like very no no they're chickens uh they tweat about the women they treat women bad well they did have they did bad abortion yeah that's very talking yeah so this is the problem is there's too much there's too much machismo there's too much patriarchy yeah but also it have a lot to do that uh in this situation uh the girls here the females study a lot they are very they're very smart they're very intelligent very calm down you already have a wife okay let's let's leave some for others okay there's a lot of people here dating a lot of people meeting new people be has been a narration for more than five years five years yes you guys over there what's your name young lady Maria Maria from colia from Colombia will be in Veno aonia and the gentle from Poland yes are you learning a little bit of Spanish at the moment sir you have this uh Novia the colia did you've met your your novio ad you you came from Colombia he came to Colombia no in China you are in China I'm seeing a pattern here okay I'm seeing pattern China the China Polish Collection is strong yes they're like first to start with Banning abortion then you accept communism okay this is the path you shall take for us okay so you guys a Polish and a Colombian walking into a bar in China no we're studying the same University you're studying where in Wuhan lucky you nice very nice you studying there what were we studying in Wuhan I study economics and you're biomedical biot computer science this is like a year abroad or were you just there for the whole degree I went for student exchange student exchange okay and yourself I was doing my whole degrees whole degrees do you speak man as well no no no I was do in English thank you I she's like I cannot we we are not friends please no I don't have that CH level so you can survive in China yeah yeah yeah unlike some Chinese people and you know at this point I've never going to China guys I'm tell you I uh and you met him in China and he told you let me tell you about Poland no I mean we went out of China because of co co yes before of Co how did you leave China humanitarian flight humanitarian flight from China yes wow somebody's jealous like who whose country saved you oh no they took him out first they took him the Polish people wanted him back they needed his sperm to make babies here okay we need more babies in this country and then how did you leave uh we had to find a little bit more bad life is not life is not easy when you're coming from the global South yes you have to fight harder and harder and who did you get on a Colombian flight did you get on yeah yeah we got a Colombian flight it was pretty long because he was like 30 people they had a couple of drop offs on South Asia there was some packets that he delivered he was like Indian SP Indian Spain okay very nice and he got here and then you decideed you were keeping in touch with him no he decided to go on vacations to Columbia so he was trapped in Columbia for like a year two years because of Co damn this man just left China and he's like I'm going to Columbia [ __ ] that [ __ ] I'm a Polish man I can do whatever I want my mom told me so the world is my oyster okay so you as a student you went to Colombia damn man Poland is doing well financially I got to say ever since very nice so you went to medalin or where did you bot and you got there and you knew he came direct to bot yes and you offered them shelter of course shelter and coma very nice and you stayed there for two how was how was Colombia I've never been I'd like to go what was your polish impression I really like it did you did you see the thing that they do there that sometimes you walk around and people are just like must have been a big cultural shock full as poor person yes like why does everybody want to kill me why is why is this the smiling people and the food The Smiling people in the food yes it has taste a round of applause for there guys well done they've been together for over five years let's tell the Romanian guy as well so you've also moved from Romania you're here you're doing business I can tell from a mustache from your watch from your suit it's a lot of business happening with this gentleman yes what's your name sir over which over o oi oi okay oi very nice o do or so it's over sure why not okay you're from Romania we're in Romania bro b v anybody know what that is no don't worry you don't need this information it's uh you will never do anything with this information yes you came from B directly to band no you made a stop was it also Ukraine or what was it it was quite a bit around quite a bit around who are you running from what were the stops you made the you made the traditional migration to Italy or Ria you went to R first no I went to Canada first Canada how did you get the visa bro help me out I'm I'm trying to leave here there's war going on you know nice you went to Canada Montreal Toronto Quebec Quebec W I don't know what West CO it's the other one Toronto no winipeg no it's uh so it's Montreal that's what it is Montreal no what which one Vancouver Vancouver [ __ ] yeah sorry I'm trying to I'm trying to stick to the other coast okay and then you came to you went so let's let's make it clear here Romania to Ria lateral move maybe a downgrade we don't know Ria to Canada upward Mobility Canada to Poland I didn't said it he said it his fault okay it's his fault and why did you come to Poland with your job for you are you in banking and what what's happening just hustling just hustling Andrew Tate's School of very nice and the young lady as well also Romanian yes and did you accompany him on this migration this tour this this Mr International Pitbull 2020 I did not you did not you just popped up here yes yeah from Romania which part of Romania Bucharest Bucharest beautiful part of Romania the center is getting better I go back to Bucharest and every time it gets a little bit better right it's a little well not not if not if you ask anybody that lives there but from the outside it looks nicer right so how long have you been in Poland for us now too long too long this guy's not making any friends tonight okay he's not making any friend only enemies Poland is a downgrade too long and what's the next destination Dubai any idea I don't know mova mdova ask that guy for tips he knows how to get out okay it's uh you guys over here what about the gentleman over there sir what's your name IIA IIA from B bellarus welcome sir when did you move here all your friends are here I uh they support your efforts political situation when when not why we kind of know why why the why is kind of rhetorical it's uh oh you you had too much F too much fun in Belarus you came here how many years have you been here for uh one and half year a little bit more oh very nice okay so you've learned here was it difficult to adapt to Poland where uh finding jobs and that kind of stuff or you're software engineer you said right I'm in N developer so so it's easy it doesn't matter I just come here and I raise the right the the rent prices it's a good system very nice and who are you here with more bans or the the gentleman is with you is your friend yeah what's your name sir o very nice also developer yeah also belarussian yeah checks out we've got 12 more nice you've been here before him or yeah yeah I came here half a yearo half a year ago and you've come here the poce people they're ni nice to you yeah you didn't see his face but he said yeah nicer than belus but that's not really a standard nowadays yes very nice you've come here and uh how do you guys make friends here do you hang out with like Polish people is there like meetups do you go to the church or how do you meet how do you expand your Social Circle here uh meetups with as a developers like awkward very nice and uh do you still have family back in Belarus no my wife is here your wife is here where is she now she don't like she's imaginary she's on the blockchain that's where she is an nft Soul ownership yes nice and your wife got a costume here as well is she also working as a developer or what was her no no no she's not working right now okay very nice okay but uh uh she's currently kind of getting used to Poland yes did you guys consider any other places other than Poland or was like was it more of a proximity decision first we moved in Ukraine oh don't play the lotto [ __ ] so you went where in Ukraine did you move uh in 2020 we moved to Ukraine and then we need people are like uh Netflix should make a documentary it's a backpacking across Eastern Europe uh from one problem to the other but in the end you get to Poland and Poland it's still Europe so uh very nice and how did you buy a house in Ukraine did you get an apartment or where you in Kev or where uh no we were in K first then we moved to leiv okay very nice yeah and then when did you move from there you wait like before or after February February 24 if I'm not mistaken yes uh we we was outside of Ukraine when when the war started when the war started yeah the special the special military [ __ ] so you basically the wor started you were outside and all your clothes were bye-bye yeah yeah yeah then we find the people who moved them here but it was some like a big adventure for them it was like a big adventure for them yes where did the war catch you that's a wonderful statement to say out loud isn't it yes where were you you outside of Ukraine where in Belarus or in Belarus ah okay very nice and then you were like I feel like the belarian government is going to have some job opportunities for me soon so yeah mobilization so and they like bye-bye yeah yeah yeah see you never well Round of Applause with gentlemen you made it here don't worry Poland is happy to have you Poland is okay to have you okay this is thank you very much for coming out guys Round of Applause for yourself thank you for coming out Round of Applause for everybody for speak Chinese Mandarin for the Romanians for the belarusians for the ukrainians for the Polish everybody the Colombians for the Chilean as well sir don't hate just Vape okay if anybody needs if everybody needs to get off cigarettes and get on Vapes talk to this guy okay can help you thank you very much and have a nice evening [Applause] [Music] bye-bye|||ARE GIVING THEM A VIRUS. >>> PRESIDENT BIDEN IS SPEAKING IN BALI, INDONESIA NOW. LET'S LISTEN LIVE. >> THE LATEST EVENTS IN EUROPE, I BRIEFED THEM ON MY DISCUSSION WITH THE PRESIDENT OF POLAND, AS WELL AS NATO SECRETARY- GENERAL SONGBIRD. WE AGREED TO SUPPORT POLLAN'S INVESTIGATION INTO THE EXPLOSION IN RURAL POLAND, NEAR THE UKRAINIAN BORDER. I WANT TO MAKE SURE WE FIGURE OUT EXACTLY WHAT HAPPENED. APPARENTLY TWO PEOPLE WERE KILLED. THEN, WE WILL COLLECTIVELY DETERMINE OUR NEXT STEP THAT WE INVESTIGATE AND PROCEED. THERE WAS TOTAL ANONYMITY AMONG FOLKS AT THE TABLE. RUSSIAN MISSILES, AS THEY'VE DEMONSTRATED THROUGHOUT THIS WAR AGAINST UKRAINE, THEY HAVE BEEN TOTALLY UNCONSCIONABLE, WHAT THEY ARE DOING, TOTALLY UNCONSCIONABLE. THE MOMENT WHEN THE WORLD HAS COME TOGETHER, THE G 20, TO URGE THE ESCALATION CALL RUSSIA CONTINUES TO TOTALLY ISOLATE UKRAINE, WHILE WE ARE MEETING. THERE WERE SCORES AND SCORES OF MISSILE ATTACKS IN WESTERN
UKRAINE. YOU SUPPORT UKRAINE UKRAINE. YOU SUPPORT UKRAINE FULLY IN THIS MOMENT, WE WILL DO WHATEVER IT TAKES TO GET THEM TO CUT BACK AND DEFEND
THEMSELVES THERE IS PRELIMINARY INFORMATION THERE IS PRELIMINARY INFORMATION . I DON'T WANT TO SAY THAT WE COMPLETELY INVESTIGATED. IT IS UNLIKELY IN THE MINDS OF THE TRAJECTORY THAT IT WAS FIRED
FROM RUSSIA, BUT WE WILL SEE. FROM RUSSIA, BUT WE WILL SEE.
WE WILL SEE. >> THAT WAS PRESIDENT BIDEN >> THAT WAS PRESIDENT BIDEN SPEAKING FROM BALI, INDONESIA, WHERE THE G 20 SUMMIT IS TAKING PLACE. HE SAID HE SPOKE TO THE SECRETARY GENERAL OF NATO AND ANDRE DUE TO, THE PRESIDENT OF POLAND, WHERE THIS OPTIC, THIS ROCKET LANDED, AND SAID, THE U.S. HAS AGREED TO SUPPORT THE INVESTIGATION, SO THEY WILL FIND OUT EXACTLY WHAT HAPPENED AND FIGURE OUT NEXT STEP. ALSO, THE LATEST RUSSIAN MISSILE ATTACKS IN UKRAINE. THEY HAVE TARGETED KEY
INFRASTRUCTURE IN UKRAINE, INFRASTRUCTURE IN UKRAINE, ESPECIALLY AROUND THE CAPITOL HEAVE AND LIBBY, IN WESTERN UKRAINE AROUND THE POLISH BORDER. YOU MAY REMEMBER IN OUR EARLIER COVERAGE, WE TALKED ABOUT PEOPLE FLEEING THROUGH THE CITY OF TEL AVIV TO CROSS THE BORDER IN POLAND. HE REFERRED TO THE LATEST RUSSIAN MISSILE ATTACKS HAS TOTALLY UNCONSCIONABLE AND SAID, WE SUPPORT UKRAINE FULLY IN THIS MOMENT. SHOUTED QUESTIONS FROM THE GAGGLE OF PRESS ASKED IF THEY BELIEVED IT WAS FIRED FROM RUSSIA. HE SAID, IF THE PRELIMINARY INFORMATION CONTESTS THAT, SAID IT IS UNLIKELY BASED ON THE TRAJECTORY, BUT WE WILL SEE. THAT KIND OF CONTRADICTS SOMETHING THAT WE HEARD FROM PRESIDENT JUDAH EARLIER WHERE HE SAID, UKRAINE'S PRESIDENT BOWL AMANDA LINSKY GAVE ADJUDICATION THAT IT WAS ROCKET LAUNCH FROM THE TERRITORY OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION. SHOULD ALSO NOTE THAT NATO HAS A FEW PROCESSES IN PLACE BEFORE ANYTHING MILITARY MIGHT HAPPEN. FIRST, IT IS ARTICLE FOUR, WHERE THEY CAN CALL FOR A MEETING ABOUT MATTERS OF CONCERN. KELLY O'DONNELL, JOINING US NOW FROM BALI INDONESIA, THERE ARE MORE CONVERSATIONS TO BE HAVE I BELIEVE BEFORE ANYTHING OF A MILITARY NATURE, OR MAYBE ANYTHING OF A DIPLOMATIC NATURE, WILL TAKE PLACE. THIS IS A BEGINNING OF A MUCH LONGER SET OF CONVERSATIONS. >> EARLY STAGES, FOR SURE. IT IS STRIKING TO HEAR FROM THE PRESIDENT AN ASSESSMENT THAT SEEMS TO CUT AGAINST WHAT THE CONVENTIONAL EXPECTATION WOULD
BE. WE LOOKED AT WHAT IS THE STATE WE LOOKED AT WHAT IS THE STATE OF UNDERSTANDING ABOUT DID RUSSIA FIRE THE MUNITION THAT IS SAID TO HAVE CAUSED THE DEATH OF TWO POLISH RESIDENTS. HE SAID IT IS UNLIKELY BUT THERE IS INFORMATION TO CONTEST THAT BASED ON THE TRAJECTORY. BUT, HE IS NOT TELLING US HOW HE KNOWS THAT., BUT IT DOES RAISE MORE QUESTIONS. IF IT IS NOT THE RESPONSIBILITY OF RUSSIA, THEN, CERTAINLY, IT WOULD TAKE THE ISSUE OF THE NATO CASE AND PUT IT INTO A DIFFERENT CATEGORY. COULD IT BE SOME KIND OF OTHER ACCIDENT?
WE WILL HAVE TO FIND OUT. WE WILL HAVE TO FIND OUT. THAT IS WHY WE OFTEN HEAR THE INVESTIGATION NEEDS TO TAKE PLACE. THE PRESIDENT ALSO TALKED ABOUT IT WILL FORCE US TO LOOK AT THE TOTALITY OF WHAT HAS BEEN HAPPENING FROM RUSSIA WITH THE ONSLAUGHT OF RUSSIAN ATTACKS ON CITIES IN UKRAINE AS A PART OF THE OVERALL CONVERSATION HERE.|||today we're in the beautiful baltic city of 
Gdańsk and we're going to be exploring around   this stunning place with you guys today so 
come along with us right now i am in front   of this beautiful statue of neptune and he is 
looking pretty heroic if you don't mind me saying   and it's a beautiful emblem for this incredible 
city because it does have such an expansive   maritime history and both of us are very 
excited to check this place out it's been   it's been on both of our lists now for quite 
some time literally since we got to poland we   were like we need to go and explore the tri-cities 
and a lot of you guys have commented saying that   we needed to come up here so that's exactly why 
we're here let's go and explore beautiful Gdańsk so right now we are in Długi Targ where you have 
the beautiful statue and fountain of neptune and   this really seems to be one of the main tourist 
attractions here you can hear loads and loads   of different languages i think we have never 
seen so many tourists and so many english speakers   german speakers french speakers and so on in 
all of poland so i think Gdańsk is one of the   most popular cities here in poland and here 
from Długi Targ you can have a beautiful view   onto the old town hall and which at the moment 
accommodates a museum and you can even go   all the way up to the tower so maybe 
that's something that we're going to do   just to get a little bit of 
a better overview of the city all right guys so we just got our tickets for 
the tower in the old city hall of Gdańsk and we're   going to make our way up now to this tower it 
supposedly has some of the best views that you can   get over Gdańsk so let's go and do it literally the 
second we made it up to tower and the sun came out   before it was a little bit cloudy here and there 
but now it's beautiful sunshine and oh my god let   me tell you something it's so beautiful up here 
you can see so incredibly far into the distance   it kind of feels like you get a whole overview 
of poland basically from here and all you can   see are those beautiful red tile roofs of the old 
city itself and you can even see very far into the   distance kind of the cranes of the port and so on 
so this is definitely a worthy start of the video   my god the views are just absolutely mind-blowing 
i cannot get over the panoramic 360 views that   you get when you get towers like this the last 
place that we had this was in Toruń and it was   simply spectacular as well this one i think is 
a little bit higher than the tower in Toruń   we definitely had to walk up a whole bunch of 
steps and we were severely out of breath for quite   some time but the views are very very much worth 
every single penny it is around 12 złoty per person   to get up here for this view and definitely 
do it if you do get the chance while you're   here in Gdańsk because it offers a stunning view 
down over Długi Targ or the long market street   you can see down very clearly all along the 
street you can see the people bustling about   and it is just absolutely amazing well well well 
worth it from this tower here as well you get this   stunning view over to saint mary's basilica which 
is the largest red brick church in all of poland   and as you can see here i even saw some people 
on the top of that tower so maybe we can go over   there and check out that tower as well because it 
seems to be a little bit higher than the one of   the old town hall but yeah you get this stunning 
view and you can really appreciate how beautiful   the basilica stands here in Gdańsk the 
streets of Gdańsk are characterized by this   beautiful cobblestone walking through these 
streets you are really reminded of the history   of this baltic port city a lot of it was sadly 
flattened during world war ii but since then   obviously a lot of it has been rebuilt to look 
similar to the way it did before that war and you   can see a lot of the history as i said in these 
beautiful streets we just had a look around saint   mary's basilica here in Gdańsk and oh my god it's 
so so stunning from the inside it's completely   white um i think i've never seen that actually in 
a church that it's completely white on the inside   just with like golden accents everywhere so it's 
beautifully decorated from the inside it looks   very peaceful very uplifting and you can indeed 
go up the tower of saint mary's basilica as well   i believe it was 14 złoty to go up but we just came 
down the other tower so we don't want to go up   another 82 meters of staircase and so we're maybe 
going to do that later or tomorrow on our own time we just had to take some cash out we just arrived 
to the beautiful river Wisła here in Gdańsk and   we're gonna go and try and get ourselves a 
boat the boat leaves now in approximately   five minutes so we should you should be able 
to catch this one stress stress stress stress   but yeah there's plenty of different types of 
boats that are just floating around have a look but this one over here is the one that 
we are trying to catch so let's go let's go now if you're coming here 
on a day where the weather   changes quite a bit make sure that you bring 
a jacket or maybe even a rain poncho because we   just got absolutely soaked in rain so so 
wet right now it is just pummeling rain   out of the sky so we came here this seems to 
be like an exchange of people getting off and   on so we came up here to get a seat under the 
roof of the upper deck and thankfully we did   the seat is still absolutely soaked though but 
it's it's fine it will be good the views all   along here are just amazing yeah and depending on 
how full the ship is as well you might not even   get a place under the roof so that's why we kind 
of got wet for a while because we had to stand   outside without the roof this this boat as 
well is it goes from Gdańsk to Westerplatte   which is kind of where world war ii actually began 
it was the first clash first battle between poland   and germany in world war ii so crazy amount 
of history and all along here you see so many   beautiful things like the Gdańsk shipyard where 
they repair boats coming in and out of Gdańsk it's   so cool it's amazing so right now you can even see 
one of the larger boats that have been for repair   in Gdańsk being pulled out by several smaller 
boats it kind of looks like maybe three   or four smaller boats are pulling it out into the 
baltic sea which is super super interesting to see that boat experience was 
one of a kind definitely   two thumbs up from us it also stopped raining 
the second we touched ground again so yeah   literally as soon as the boat trip was over 
it stopped raining but throughout the entire   throughout the entire trip on the boat itself it 
was just lashing down really really heavily rain   so we spent the majority of it trying to look for 
cover on the boat but nonetheless we captured some   really nice footage for you guys and that boat 
trip is definitely worth every second now we're   getting pretty hungry so we're gonna go and 
try and find a nice restaurant to get some food   here in beautiful Gdańsk let's go these buildings 
over here are really really interesting looking   it kind of reminds me and naomi of the 
Speicherstadt which we saw in hamburg   not too long ago you'll probably use these 
people with balloons are everywhere as well   they have just these giant long strings 
of balloons and me and naomi have been hit   in the head multiple times we got smacked in the 
face with balloons several times but yeah those   buildings are really interesting and we went to 
hamburg made like a little bit of a stop over   there and it looks like the Speicherstadt area in 
hamburg so that's really interesting so we made   our way into a milk bar it's actually called milk 
bar Stągiewna and it seems to be incredibly popular with   a lot of polish people around here have a look 
around the restaurant right now it's absolutely   packed we have no idea what we're going to order 
but we're just going to pick something at random   off the menu and then we're going to go and enjoy 
some food you can find milk bars pretty much all   over poland and to be honest these are usually our 
favorite restaurants because you are guaranteed to   get a pretty large meal for a very small amount of 
money just to give you an example we just got two   kotlet schabowy which is pretty much schnitzel 
with with some potatoes and dill on the side   and we paid 48 złoty in total which is like around 
10 euro and for two huge meals which is absolutely   amazing those two meals were really really tasty 
as well so in case you do come to Gdańsk make sure   to check out this milk bar here and just to give 
you a little bit of context with the milk bars as   far as we understood the milk bars are kind of a 
leftover of communism itself so those were usually   the types of places where you could get a large 
meal for a little amount of money right yeah and   the name itself as far as i'm aware the name milk 
bar comes from cheese curd or cheese leftovers   and that was because in the times of communism 
meat itself was very rare and difficult   to come by and it all kind of ties in together 
this is exactly why we tried to find ourselves   a milk bar to visit here in Gdańsk because Gdańsk 
itself was where the fall of communism started in   poland which is pretty magnificent and yeah milk 
bars perfect place to go if you do want to spend   just a little bit of money but you want to fill 
up your tummy something that we like to do on   our channel every now and then as well for you 
guys especially for our polish viewers is to   give you guys exactly what a certain place looks 
like during a certain time so we just turn the   camera around and give you the raw and other feel 
of what the place is currently like at the moment   and today it is a relatively rainy wednesday 
here in Gdańsk but we may as well show you guys   what the beautiful long market or Długi Targ 
area looks like here in Gdańsk so check it out oh we are such children we walked past 
the sweet factory store called the dansk   sweet factory and we decided to go in and get 
ourselves some pick and mix very first time   actually we managed to walk past these types 
of stores for one and a half years and today   was just a day where we were like okay we need 
to go and grab ourselves some candy we gave in initially we were planning on taking you to the 
baltic sea right now but because the weather is   only so-so and we made the decision to 
come to this mall here which is called   forum check this out they have a little 
river inside of the mall how cool is that i'm sure however that we will be taking you to 
the baltic sea in the next two videos because   one of them is going to be from sopot and the 
other one is going to be from gdynia right yeah   we are in the tri cities and this is our first 
stop of the tri-cities beautiful Gdańsk and we   cannot wait to check out the other two that mall 
forum Gdańsk is a really interesting and unique   mall the architecture in there is just something 
else and we've never seen a mall like that that   just has a river cutting through the mall all 
really interesting and plenty of things to check   out there we just went in because it started 
raining once again unfortunately the weather   is not on our side today but speaking of shopping 
Gdańsk is known as the amber capital of the baltics   so there's plenty of places to you can go and get 
yourself beautiful amber souvenirs all over this   amazing city by the way here in Gdańsk and all over 
poland and the larger cities really you find these   crazy super malls pretty much everywhere but 
not only one of them usually several ones of   them so for example here in Gdańsk we just went to 
that forum mall but there's also a mall very very   close to us which i believe is called the galeria 
bałtycka or something like that which is equally   large like so big that you can genuinely get lost 
in there so in case you do forget something when   you have when you get to poland there's always the 
option to stock up on stuff that you might need alright guys so great thing to know if you are 
going to be coming and staying in Gdańsk there is a   tram that connects a lot of the city and we are 
staying in an airbnb that's just outside of Gdańsk   so that saved us quite a bit of money if you do 
want to stay directly in the center obviously   it's going to be a little bit more money so we 
ended up getting a place just outside of Gdańsk and   saved ourselves a good bit so we are just using 
the tram now to get back to our accommodation   but yeah this is this was our kind of quick 
first impression of Gdańsk city of Gdańsk   and it is absolutely a beautiful place 100 worth 
visiting in my personal opinion what do you think   i couldn't agree more with you i feel 
like Gdańsk has a very very unique   charm to it especially the architecture 
and the river itself and even the boat cruise that   we did today even though the weather was not 
great it was an absolutely unique experience   and i do recommend for you to do that as 
well even though the weather might be bad   but yeah guys for now my name is luke my name 
is naomi and we are the two mod explorers and   this is your reminder to keep exploring i will see 
you guys in the next video thanks for watching bye|||- Today, I'm going house hunting for the very first time in my life. This is interesting. (upbeat music) And guess what? I'm house hunting in the
mountains of Southern Poland. There's a magic here. So today I get to check out some really interesting properties, ranging from the very
rundown to the very plush. But will any of them
turn out to be the one? This place is one in a million. Here's a bit of context. Over the last year or so, I've been dreaming of
finding a place to call home. And originally I imagined that to be in the Western United States. Last year when I spent a month in Montana, I just felt so at home. I really felt like that was my place. But given the craziness of the
real estate market in the US, I kind of gave up on that dream. And honestly, that's a
pretty hard reality check. So last week, I shipped my
entire life back to Europe, including my truck, all my
stuff, and my dog, Vilk. Hey buddy, does Europe smell different? So, I guess that means
I'm kind of committing to finding something out here. (foreign language) Let's see if I can find my dream
property in the Motherland. Yes, I wanna have something
equally traditional, but. Well, welcome to Poland. I am Polish, in case you didn't know, although, I haven't lived
here in over 20 years. I moved away when I was a kid and spent most of my life in the UK. And to be completely honest with you, I didn't think I'd ever
come back, not to live here, or at least, not to try and
find a place to live here. But here we are in my search for a home, I have come to the Carpathian
Mountains in Southern Poland, one of the most magical places in Europe. And today I'm gonna see if I can find a place to potentially call home. (Eva laughing) Isn't that kind of crazy? Isn't that just so wild, that
I could live here, maybe? (car engine starting) I knew exactly who to call upon to learn more about life in the mountains. They've been living
here for over 10 years, and in that time they've managed to build a true slice of heaven,
largely by themselves, but they started out
with just a ruined barn, little money and a big dream. Here, I brought them a gift
all the way from Montana. Hope they enjoy it. - Wow. - This is Gorna Chata. A small boutique hotel
that Kasia and Leszek lovingly built on the
side of this mountain over the last decade. It's so hard to describe in words the level of silence and serenity I feel every time I come to visit them. If I could move in here
tomorrow, I probably would, (Eva laughing) but since that's not really an option, I'll have to find my own oasis. And I still think this is one
of the most magical places in all of Europe, if not the world, the Carpathian Mountains. It's, yeah, probably my favorite
spot on the continent. You know, it's kind of
funny how this is really such a gem and it's kind
of still a hidden gem. I mean, in Eastern Europe, you know, people know about the
Carpathian Mountains, but out west, nobody
knows about this place, which is what makes it so
special and so pristine, still. (calm music) And I think that's why
I would like to come and maybe live here, because
it still feels wild. Since I came here for the
first time two years ago, I have just been completely in love with what Kasia and
Leszek have created here. And quite honestly, I kind of wanna use some of
their ideas as inspiration for my future home. So I'm gonna go and
check out their cottages, which are for rent, by the way, and see what I like about them. 'Cause man, this is like, this place is one in a million. It's incredible. (serene music) This kind of bathtub, oh yes. Okay, but the best part about this cottage and the one that I find most inspiring is this upstairs area. (serene music) Oh my God, I remember sitting
here in this very hammock two years ago and thinking about how much I wanna make a
place like this my home. Someday you'll see me
making videos about building a wooden hut in the forest. And now I'm back and I'm
actually looking around. (serene music) So, this living room here is,
obviously, absolutely huge. And I probably wouldn't need
a dining table this big, but I just love the like earthy feel here. I love all the decor. I love how light it feels. There's so much light coming in. I love the fairy lights,
obviously, they're so cute. Okay, so then, they've
got this beautiful terrace with a tree growing
through the middle of it. How cool is that? You know, there's a
million holiday cottages and home designs out there that, you know, are really beautiful and
luxurious and that look natural, but Kasia and Leszek, I
think can teach me a lot about like how to integrate
nature into my future house. They're like all about
sustainability, truly and deeply. They're about unique design
and, you know, they're vegan. They have animals that they
take care of here on this land, but you know, that don't work or anything. I'm happy to have them as teachers. So I'm gonna go and ask
them some questions about what it's like to live here and whether my dream of possibly building a house here is actually realistic. It might give me a reality check, but I need to know. I need to know. (upbeat music) But before we get into the hot tub, a quick word from the
partner of this video and one of my ultimate
travel hacks, Surfshark VPN. Today we're gonna learn
about the advantages of using Surfshark VPN with Vilk. Hey buddy, did you say you
had some questions about VPNs? (dog grunting) (upbeat music) Well, buddy, since we travel so much, we're usually using hotel and Airbnb wifi, and there's really no way to know whether any of those
networks are actually safe. They do give us a sense of false security, but they could actually be
hiding many different privacy and security threats. Got it? Still following? (dog grunting) So if you ever use
unfamiliar wifi networks to make online purchases or access any kind of personal data, including online banking, you could be compromising your privacy. So to prevent that, I
just turn on Surfshark VPN and it keeps my location secret and encrypts, basically
secures, all of my online data. (dog panting) Yes, I'm glad you asked. So Surfshark allows you to access content and content streaming services
from all around the world. For example, if you wanna watch reruns of your favorite show, but it's not available
on the Netflix catalog in your country, you can just switch locations
and look in another country. For me, that's definitely "The Office". Oh, I guess he doesn't
know what "The Office" is. Well, I think I've got something that you might like in the UK. (wolf howling) Well, we've already got our Surfshark VPN, so we're good to go. And you guys can also benefit
from a Black Friday deal. Just go to this link, enter
my promo code, evazubeck and enjoy up to six months of free VPN. I also left the link in
the description box below. Oh, and by the way, there's a
30 day money back guarantee, so there is really no
risk in trying it out. Well, safe to say that
Kasia and Leszek gave me just the push I needed to get out there and start seeing some actual
properties in the area. But before going totally
in on the wild idea, I wanted to see what's out there. And the first property I'm going to visit is this ruin of a
mountain hut in the woods. It looks like this is the
road that the hut is on, and if it's true, then
that means that the hut is really close to the main road, which is a bit of a bummer. I kind of, I wanted to go somewhere a little bit more remote, but let's see, let's check it out. Maybe I'm wrong. Okay, this is not it. But I was told that I
should go across this plot and into the woods, somewhere over there. When I called a real estate
agent about this place, she said that these buildings
here will be taken down because the person that built
them didn't actually have a building permission. So, yeah, that sucks. (intense music) Okay, I think I see the hut. It's right here. Oh my God. (Eva laughing) This is, this is interesting. (intense music) Hey buddy, do you like it? It's absolutely gorgeous. It's a traditional Polish,
Carpathian Mountain hut, built in the traditional style. You know, this is the kind of hut that shepherds would've lived in, and you still see a lot of these buildings all around this region. So, I don't have the keys because
the real estate agent said I could just look inside to see for myself the state of the place. Huh. Yeah. Wow. That's bad. (Eva giggling) That's so, so bad. Nah, absolutely not. I mean, it's, it is a ruin, but I think that's almost secondary. The main thing is the hut is right next to a
really busy, really loud road, and it is $125,000 for a very
small plot of land and a ruin and a really bad location. I mean, seeing it, I'm like, yes, I wanna have something
equally traditional, but hearing it,
(Eva giggling) I also know that I just
wanna be as far away from roads as possible. So, yeah, this bacowka is not for me. Let's get outta here, buddy. (serene music) I would say that this property here, was like on the lower end
of the spectrum for me. As in, I would only invest
in renovating a mountain hut if it had like a really
spectacular location, you know? Then I might think about it, but this is not it, so. There's a few more places
I wanna check out though, so all isn't lost. Let's go and see them. After seeing this bacowka or mountain hut, I thought back to what Kasia and Leszek shared with me earlier. This next house I'm about to see is very, very, very different. I'm kind of excited to see it. The villa we're about to see is definitely way out of my price range, but you know, it can't hurt to see a
beautiful mountain home for some inspiration. This is a very plush,
turnkey villa overlooking the Podhale Mountains. This house is so beautiful. (serene music) (Eva sighing) Oh my God, such a dream. (serene violin music) Okay, wow, I can already see it's so huge. So this is the living room and there's a pretty small kitchen here, and it's all just decked out
in this beautiful natural wood. And this fireplace, also super traditional
Polish old-school style and I definitely want
one of those in my house in the future. All right, well, let's check it out. It's pretty huge, so, we better get going. So there's an office here downstairs, which is very lovely. Okay, room number one. Room number two, three, and room number four. Okay, I guess this is the master bedroom. So nice. And here is one of the bathrooms. What is that? (Eva giggling) Oh my God, is this like a, oh my God, it's like a sit-in sauna. That is wild. But this is not everything, there's also like a whole basement area. Room number 85, room number (door opening) 86, room number 87. Oh, what's this? It's locked. (Eva knocking) That's kind of creepy, like the entrance to a secret tunnel or a torture chamber or something. (door closing) I think I wanna get outta here now. Well, this house is such a dream house. The architecture is so perfect. It's exactly how I would
want my future house to look, but this is not the one because it's way too big. It's so huge. I don't even need a building
half this size, you know? I mean, yes, there is a beautiful view, but only if you look that way. If you look to the right and to the left, you've got neighbors and the garden is very small. So for about four, just over $400,000, nah, this is not the one. Knowing the price and
the size of this villa I thought back to what Kasia
and Leszek shared with me when we met up. Well, let's recap. Renovating a total ruin
next to a busy road, uh, not an option. A plush turnkey mansion with an epic view but loads of neighbors and too much space and also too expensive, not an option either. But there's one more. Okay, here we are, this is the last house that I'll be seeing today. It's a bit of a wild card, I'll admit, but I was just really curious to see what it would be like to live
in the middle of a village in a really beautiful historic house. So, let's see. (serene music) If you can ignore my
shoddy camera work here, that would be very appreciated, thank you. This house has been standing on its own and abandoned for almost 30 years, and in that time, nobody
has paid the light bills. It was a strange mix of the
two properties I saw earlier. A bit of a ruin, yet retaining some of that
traditional mountain grandeur with beautiful wooden interiors, those dreamy Eastern European
stoves and fireplaces, and clearly, a lot of work ahead for anyone willing to invest in it. There's even a little side house, what we might traditionally
call an (foreign language) in Polish. A small room with many functions and sometimes, a whole
family living inside it. I mean, such a cool
idea to like go in there and restore a house like that, but I won't even know
where to begin, you know. That is just such a huge project. And the house is in the middle of village, which I didn't quite appreciate. So it's not really the kind of, you know, natural oasis that I've been dreaming of. So, not the one. None of those three
houses were quite right. So far, I wasn't finding
anything even remotely realistic, but then again, I wasn't really expecting to find anything right away. Instead, I was hoping to use
this as a learning experience, you know, to see what's even out there. And here are my biggest takeaways. A traditional architectural
style, yes, a big yes. A great view, another yes. Ah! A big plot of land, yep. Neighbors, nope. Size, you know what they say about size. No, but seriously, something
small will suffice. Well, I loved seeing all three properties and learning more about what
I liked and didn't like, but for now, winter is quickly arriving in the Polish mountains and that is not a good time
to house hunt out here. The snow gets serious. So I'm gonna keep my eyes peeled
on the real estate websites and hopefully come back
in a couple of months to see if anything else has popped up. But for now, I am headed south, much further south,
towards warmer weather. Hey, if you'd like for your
name to appear in these credits or if you'd like to get early access to all of my YouTube videos, or if you'd like to get
access to my making off slash behind the scenes videos for every single film
that I publish on YouTube, you may wanna subscribe
to my Patreon community. There's loads of different perks. Patreon is where I
usually post my early life and travel updates, where I make loads of exclusive content and we get a chance to connect
on live calls, as well. It's a really, really great community and yeah, if you'd like to see more of me, this is the link, somewhere
here, on the screen. Anyway, see you in the next video.|||Hello friends today we talk about very important subject from my point of view what is the most than euro thing in Poland I am from another country so many things in Po in Poland people think it's europeo for me it's very very Weir and the UN Euro weed what country you from China China Asian country the culture are so different so I have a lot of culture shock I'm going to tell you this today and since today's video is a talking video we have to prepare some drink yeah leer okay I'm prepared today all right like French people they bring their wine everywhere and German people take their people a beer everywhere Polish people take vertica everywhere this is not Li we don't have vka we take liquor everywhere so this is a caramel taste lior right and it's a gift from our friends usually we don't drink aloh at home and it's interesting to try polish Le because they have different tast let's try this [Music] first it's quite good nice okay so let's start our first first point what is the very unur in Poland I think Polish people are are not afraid of coldness they don't feel what did I say ah so let's start talk about are you drunk Polish people we soow little to clothes you know I observe that through the whole year except for the hottest days I always wear two times three times more cloth more clothes than Polish people in the street like 10° I still see people walking with a sh so I I always wear a lot of clothes and at the same time my husband this one he he always say so hot so hot thinking oh my God what's wrong with him and and especially in the night my feet are so cold and I have to hug him to steal heat from him but he's like a like a heat ball is always and me it heat so it's good that we have something I don't need any I don't need the hot water what what is it called that you know you can put the hot water inside this thing and hold this the kindest people like it so so in other words your shock is that I'm hot you and many other people you didn't try other people do I have to try I can see that they when I'm shaking in the coldness they don't feel anything okay they have a very thin blouse and and short [Music] t-shirt so let's talk about the second thing so second thing for me I think it's weird to see at films movies from from another country at the Polish people will make it lectors they call it the lect so it's like the movie are in original sound but there is a person a man a male voice reading the Polish subtitle there are no subtit without emotion that's very weird very weird for me like I cannot get used to this so it's not a dabbing there is original sound yes original dialoges yeah can hear them in language but besides of this there is a Polish lecto talking in Polish there are no subtitles in Polish yeah sometimes they are writing so so I don't I don't know what Polish people listen listen to the people who are talking or people listen to the movie they listen to know to polish Lector so it's really really weird I never heard of this before I came to Poland okay okay next one next one is that no the Polish post shop they say all different kinds of small things books souvenirs toys and children toys Children books it's hard to recognize which one is the major business for me not it's not it's not it's like a shop it's not hard to recognize anymore these are shops literally right now they also soap and shampoo and I don't know all type of nonsense umbrellas they are shops and by the way still sometimes you can send a letter there that's really weird because you know everything's so colorful and where I'm going to send my letter what I'm going to what am I doing there a magic word for children well I believe that children will be very happy to go there and it's like a Chinese shop the Chinese shop is also interesting in Poland we see everywhere there are Chinese shop and and before I enter one I imagine that I can find a lot of Chinese or Asian food or ingredients there spices whatever but they have nothing they have nothing related to food they sell clothes or small items tools and many other things but there's no food this is very we for me you know yeah in China there is a city very famous it's called e they produce trippy the all those small items I I think that this Chinese shop is just a copy of the city it's so interesting yeah so I don't know how important this Chinese shop is to p polish people's everyday life I've never been there in my entire life and other Polish people do you you really buy things there I have no idea but there are so many of these shops that I don't know they have to sell something right another shop I hope they are Che okay the next one next one I forgot I have to think about it next thing is that Polish people celebrate their name day they have a calendar of the names and which day they could celebrate it's like a birthday but more important than the birthday right many people don't celebrate birthday but they celebrate name day yeah so I can but my name is not on the calendar so I cannot celebrate my name day another very unur thing for me that maybe it's it's um more about a person or it but I have to say many Polish people think it's very polite to take over shoes if you visit somebody's home you go to other people home and they take all their shoes so let me ask you you go there and the host provide you a slipper will you will you wear the slipper I this is a problem of hyg personal Hy so so what people do in China in this situation wait wait wait I have to finish this so so if the person provide so if the house provide you a slipper and you think I don't want to wear the slipper that other people wear in this case you have to walk with your bare foot on the floor or you have a socks yeah but same I I feel like if there's no shoes like I'm walking with a bare food so on one hand it's very cold on the other hand if the host the same work without show then it's okay but if they have a showe at home but I have to work without a show it's very weird I feel like I am what walking cleaning clothes that wherever I go I clean there it's really really weird yeah it would not happen usually oh yeah it doesn't fit for all the people because the GU the guys they can always take their own you know sleepers when they go to visit somebody yeah you do like this yes why not well maybe it's for closer people if you take your shes to more you know decent colleague does it look [Music] weird no not so much oh in China people noway people really don't care too much where that you wear your showes in their home if they can they will provide you a plastic in this this what what is the name of this in English plastic BS protection yeah protection plastic protection for your shoes yeah just a simple one pretty one you wear once and you throw it away kind show so you can protect and at the same time sleep parade you can use that or in closa family they'll provide you a king sleeper sleeper and usually for example like my uncle each time the gas went away they will clean the sleeper sleeper yes they will do it that's not so bad so mostly if if we want our guest take off shows then it's it's for closer people like family member so like a normal friends and we will not ask people to take our shoes Okay okay so I think that's it's already Five Points that it's very weird for me in Poland how do you think about it should see okay leave your comment below and then watch our videos and subscribe byebye you have to finish it [Music] not|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Poland's historic presidential palace
and a banquet given tonight in honour of the Queen by 
President Kwaśniewski, a former communist who succeeded Lech Wałęsa 
last November amid considerable bitterness. Beef, incidentally, was on the menu. Polish beef. Poland is a very important market 
for many British exports, and despite continuing 
Russian opposition, it’s pursuing stronger links with the West, 
a political point underlined by the Queen. We strongly support the enlargement of 
the European Union and of NATO. We welcome your aspirations 
to join these institutions. Earlier, somber
reminders of the Holocaust. The Queen and Prince Philip
went to the site of a station from which 300,000 Jews were 
transported to Nazi death camps. A ceremony added after British Jews
criticised the fact there'll be no visit to the most notorious camp, 
Auschwitz, in southern Poland. British officials insist there simply
isn't time for the Queen to go there. I wish that every human being
would visit Auschwitz, but certainly I'm very grateful
that the Queen is visiting here, the Umschlagplatz,
and paying tribute. It's not that she doesn't know, but 
the impression that visit Auschwitz makes could be strong and perhaps 
have some consequences. Much happier thoughts in 
Warsaw's Old Town square, entirely reconstructed after the 
devastation of World War Two. It was the Queen's first 
Polish walkabout. Local corgis met
the world's most famous corgi owner. Those close enough
heard her remark that it made one feel so very much at home. It makes one feel 
very much at home. More enthusiastic crowds, 
with or without corgis, are predicted tomorrow.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||I've just found out that during World War II 
Poland sent their declaration of war to Japan   because they were on opposite sides but Japan 
refused it okay I'm confused so let's find out   a little bit more in today's video Jin do let's go 
when you make a formal declaration of war the last   thing you expect is for it to be rejected but this 
is what happened to Poland during World War II   when its government in Exile declared war in Japan 
the Japanese refused to accept this declaration as   valid and thus promptly ignored it which raises a 
pretty obvious question why why did Japan refuse   to acknowledge that Poland was at war with it so 
During the interwar period Japan and Poland had   very good relations this was due to their Mutual 
dislike of the Soviet Union and the two Nations   cooperated deeply in conducting Espionage within 
the USSR well I never I didn't even realize that   there was even a link between Poland and Japan I I 
didn't you know there quite quite far away on the   world scale of things um their cultures are well 
a lot different so I never realized that those two   countries now I know this video is a simplified 
version obviously uh it's a short anim animated   documentary but it'll tell hopefully the gist 
of things without getting into stupid amounts   of detail but I never knew there was any form of 
link between you know Japan and Poland you know   throughout history you know there's um countries 
that have special relations like the UK and us   for some reason um you know there are different 
countries that are friends and it's quite obvious   why they're friends a lot of the Scandinavian 
countries they you know they work together and   you that makes sense Poland and Japan okay let's 
see what else happened Japanese listing stations   were located within Poland and polish spies 
were smuggled in and out of the USSR by the   vast Japanese puppet state of manchukuo however 
as you all know the Japanese allied with the   Germans during the second world war and its Ally 
conquered Poland the Japanese deeply disapproved   of this in part because their close Ally had just 
been wiped out but also because Germany had done   this in tandem with the USSR which the Japanese 
government viewed as its greatest threat that said   there wasn't anything that it could do about 
the destruction of Poland and so the Japanese   simply said nothing at least publicly privately 
Japan supported the Polish government in London   and the two continued to spy on the USSR together 
of course at this point Japan wasn't at war with   the Western Powers but when this changed in 1941 
the Polish government in Exile declared war in   Japan like their hosts so the Japanese response 
was simple no we're not actually at War it's I   think I think Japan I think in times of War you 
have to pick a side and you have to pick a side   on um who who your kind of your country's beliefs 
sort of align most with and also who you think is   going to win as well right because there's no 
look I I appreciate I appreciate um you should   always you know you should always do it for the 
moral side of things but if you join a side that   you think is probably going to lose even with 
your help then that's not the right thing for   your people so I don't know enough about the 
Japan joining the war with Germany um but it's   putting this in a light of it was a tough decision 
that actually they didn't necessarily agree with   everything the Germans did and maybe they didn't 
know to what extent the Germans were doing things   um but obviously they had this relationship with 
Poland that they didn't agree you know that that   Germany were basically trying to wipe them off 
the face of the Earth but they clearly knew the   danger of speaking out against Germany and then 
what became the Soviets and later on and things   like that and yeah probably a tricky position 
for them to be in main justification was that   the Polish government in Exile wasn't free to 
do as it chose and was at this point a client   of the British acting under immense pressure 
from the Americans thus as far as the Japanese   were concerned the Polish didn't really want to 
declare war on their old allies and friends don't   let friends declare war on Friends against their 
will of course the Japanese also viewed countries   like Australia New Zealand India and Canada in the 
same light but they accepted their Declarations   of War and the reason for that was proximity 
Poland was half a world away and unable to do   anything whereas the others could project forces 
near enough to Japan to cause a potential issue   also they sat where Japan wanted to expand her 
Empire another issue was that whilst they wished   to continue working with the Polish in order to 
spy on the USSR they didn't want to upset their   German allies too much and acknowledging the 
declaration of war would also be acknowledging   that a Poland still existed so after the ignored 
declaration of war what happened well nothing the   Polish couldn't do anything against Japan because 
they had much more pressing issues closer to home   and when Japan surrendered to the Allies Poland 
wasn't at the Ceremony this was because during   negotiations with the USSR the Western allies had 
agreed to stop recognizing the Polish government   in Exile as legitimate and so after this where 
normal relations were restored between Japan   and the Allies in 1951 Poland's representative 
was the head of the Polish People's Republic a   communist state which Japan was not a fan of and 
the two held no formal relations until 1957 this   was when Japan acknowledged communist rule there 
as legitimate and also sought of maybe made peace   despite not really ever having been to war just to 
sort of get things over with a fantastic Channel   honestly they do some really good stuff and it's 
meant to be bite-sized right so there's things   there that I didn't actually realize so uh like 
I said I didn't realize at how close Japan and   Poland were in a relationship before World War 
II and then it does make me think like I said   about how Japan they probably had tricky tricky 
decisions to make uh you know yes I think they   clearly believed the Germans were going to win 
the war that obviously didn't work so like I   said you've got to pick a side if you're going to 
join a war uh and you don't want to pick a side   that you think is going to lose and clearly they 
thought the Germans were going to win but then you   know they were friends with the polls who thought 
screw you you are joining the Germans and we know   the relationship or the previous relationship 
at least between poles and the Germans um it's   not been healthy for for years and then the so 
as well come into the mix a real mess I would   like to know what the relationship is like now 
between Poland and Japan if you're polish um   what do you think of the Japanese do you realize 
that there there was or even is a relationship a   possible working relationship between the two 
countries it just seems strange because like I   said they're not exactly close you can understand 
for example why the United Kingdom and Australia   have a relationship because that was the United 
Kingdom's penal colony colony and that's where   we sent um all the convicts and things so you can 
understand that but what is the link why why other   than you know the Soviets why did Poland and Japan 
work pretty closely together before World War II   it leaves me of a few questions but did answer 
I suppose well I said it answered some questions   it told me some things I never knew about so 
there we go I wonder if you knew about this   did you know about the close relationship between 
Poland and Japan let me know down in the comments   an interesting one for you today make sure you 
like And subscribe and I'll catch you next time Papa|||- What are your favorite things about Warsaw? - 
First of all the people are very ambitious and   creative and I feel like I'm surrounding myself 
with people that want to get stuff done in their   life number two this city never sleeps I'm finally 
in a place where even on a Monday or a Tuesday you   can go to an amazing party and just live your 
life to the fullest not just on a Friday - I   Love The Nightlife here because you can find 
wherever you want you can find history places   more fancy ones I love as well the restaurants the 
quality of food here the people the girls as well Vitam z Warszawy! There 
behind me have one of the iconic   buildings in the city the Palace of Culture 
and you just heard from three opinions   from three different nationalities that 
you're going to meet a lot here in Poland   if you come in 2023 so let's get into it five 
reasons to come to Poland this year let's go! So reason number one is the 
price level here in Poland   here in Warsaw as in many cities with a number 
of refugees who have come from Ukraine in the last   year there is a little bit of a higher premium 
for central rent in the capital but in general   it is a standard price level for Eastern Europe 
so depending where you live in the West it could be   even a third of the price I would say it's about 
yeah half the price here of say London or Paris,   a Dublin, a Munich for example a Stockholm maybe 
it's even a bit cheaper than that so you'd have   that great value for money here in Poland compared 
to what you're going to expect to pay if you're in   North America or in Western Europe for a big city 
because this city is around 2 million people in   population and it's obviously a capital of a European 
country number two reason is the dating not   only do you have the pretty Poles here in Poland 
you also have a lot of single girls who've come   tragically obviously with the war in Ukraine to 
Poland there's I think still a million Ukrainians   who came as refugees in the country and actually 
prior to that there was already a big Ukrainian   diaspora here on top of that you have a lot 
of young people who've come from Belarus so   you have a lot of beautiful Belarusians as well 
who are here so definitely in terms of dating   compared to Western Europe or North America it 
is very attractive for guys here for sure perhaps   not quite as attractive as further Eastern Europe 
but still lots of great dating opportunities and   as most of my viewers are single guys definitely 
going to be of great interest here reason number   three is the variety of cities in Poland because 
right up in the north you have the seaside so you've   got Gdańsk which is a pretty cool city then you 
also you've got mountains you can even go skiing   in the south of Poland and you obviously have a 
big cosmopolitan capital like Warsaw you also   have student towns like Lublin where else have 
you got you've got Poznań so Łódź you have just   a lot of different options in Poland because 
it is a significantly big country in Europe   has population about 40 million and different 
topography and size of cities and yeah whether   they're student towns or college town or they're 
a big cosmology couple like War so you definitely   have a good bit of diversity here so that is 
something that's great in Poland and then reason   number four is the level of English here compared 
to the other options in Eastern Europe the level   of English is pretty high it's almost as high 
as in Scandinavia and the Netherlands I would   say in Wars saw at least Education First they rate 
English language proficiency as a foreign language   across the globe and Poland is actually in the 
top tier at this stage it's definitely the level of English   is very high you will not have problems talking to 
people in general with a few exceptions so that is   something that's good if you're going to talk 
then to the Belarusians or Ukrainian diaspora   they also tend to speak basic English but it will 
be a little bit less because English is not as   widely spoken in their countries so of course if 
you speak the local language if you learn Polish   I've seen it with my French friend who's been 
here who does speak some Polish it makes a big   difference you will move out of the tourist box 
and people who are going to be polite enough to   you if you speak in English in the restaurants and 
the bars if you chat to people socially if you're   talking to local girls but if you can learn some 
Polish it will make a significant difference I   have seen it because you move out of that tourist 
box because very few guys actually learn Polish   who come here from other countries on top 
of it if you speak Russian or Ukrainian or Belarusian   for those diasporas then it's also going to be 
a big advantage but basically compared to the   other countries in the east of Europe this 
is of course Central Europe should state Poland is   in central but it is the eastern part of Central 
Europe but compared to the countries further east   the level of English is dramatically better here it is not 
far off being in Sweden or the Netherlands or yeah   countries were really they almost speak better 
English than me and then finally I would say   fifth reason is the level of the infrastructure 
because it had been a good few years since I   have been back in Poland and I notice that the 
infrastructure has just gotten better and better   really there's for me here in Warsaw is there 
a big difference between being here and been in   the cities big metropolises further to the West 
like being in Berlin or Munich or London or Paris   in terms of infrastructure? Not very much really 
Poland's economy has been so strong over the last   15 years at least they didn't even have I think an 
economic recession in that in 2008 as a result of   the economic collapse everywhere else around the 
globe and it's just gone from strength to strength and   you see that they have invested a lot of money 
in their infrastructure with airports and just   the the public transport here is great I think 
in Warsaw I've been very impressed by it and you   obviously have trains going across Europe as well 
so pretty yeah I mean this is the West it's the   eastern part of the West it's the eastern part of 
Central Europe it is not a third world country   whatsoever it is first world here in Poland so 
that is something that is a good reason to come   if you're looking for a little bit more of the 
you know a comfortable environment also crime at   least in the center of Warsaw from what I've seen 
is very low I don't feel insecure walking around   at all at night here in the center it seems pretty 
safe there are a lot of police actually out so   yeah I just think for the overall experience 
Poland pretty pretty impressive at the moment   so there you have my five reasons to consider 
coming here and hanging out in Poland in 2023   now with the Russo-Ukrainian War still ongoing 
I am not currently bringing clients to Ukraine,   Russia or Belarus so in lieu of that I've 
actually been here did a little bit of a   teaser for the tsar experience with a client 
who's going to join me in Riga in Latvia   very soon just before that I'm actually going to 
go back to Chișinău in Moldova with a client   and probably after using going back to Almaty 
the Big Apple of Kazakhstan so it could be you   living it up on the tsar experience with me what 
are you doing next weekend? Because down below is   the application form for the tsar experience it 
is by application only it is not for everybody   it has to be a good fit for both of us and before 
you go and click on the application form please   go and check out the playlist I'll put up here 
in a card of some videos with previous client   testimonials and some vlogs from the cities where 
we've lived the tsar experience in the past and   also the current cities that are on offer and 
in summary you know Warsaw can be a great place   for you if you're looking to schmooze with a 
pretty Pole or meet a Ukrainian hottie or 2   without the risk of a Russian rocket 
attack or maybe a Belarusian babe without   yeah the chance of being roughed up by one of 
Lukashenka's Omon thugs which actually happened   to a guy I know in Belarus so yeah come and 
consider Warsaw, Poland as a place to come to   and for me it's actually been about five years 
since I've been here it's kind of remarkable   it took me so long to come back and yeah it's 
been a good old two weeks that I've spent here   checking out the city doing the reconnaissance 
for the future clients on the tsar experience so   I will bid you do widzenia trying to work in my 
Polish over the last couple of weeks and yeah   let's fingers crossed that soon enough we can go 
back and live the tsar experience in Ukraine   after Ukraine's victory in this war до перемоги! 
See you in the next video ciao-ciao from Warsaw Poland!|||where we're going Karolina? Kazimierz
Dolny. Where? Kazimierz Dolny Hola amigos ,welcome to a new video I'm
Chido-Fajny and today I'm in a really special place in Poland this city this
small city is called Kazimierz Dolny so I will take you to explore it so
follow me guys Kazimierz Dolny is located in the south
part of Poland close to one of the most famous cities in Poland which is called
Lublin.  The population of these like small town is only 2600 people so yeah
it's pretty small but totally worth it if you visit it one or two days tops
I think it will be ideal for you so guys now we're going to the
top of the city to a viewing point where you can appreciate the whole city but
you need to climb a lot of stairs so just be ready guys in case you visit now, check this amazing view Say Hi Tamal beautiful beautiful view of Kazimierz Dolny now guys I'm in the ruins of the castle
of Kazimierz Dolny it's a pretty pretty hot today and sorry I'm sweating look
Karolina and Tamal they are dead now it's pretty hot so I will show you the
castle this is a view and I think the city loves stairs, here we go again are going to the tower of the castle and we arrived to the tower if you decide to come to this
castle just bear in mind that you will need to climb a lot of stairs, it's pretty exhausting, that's why I'm talking like this we are in Wąwóz Korzeniowy
it's a difficult name well it's basically like like a road like in the
middle of the forest which is pretty nice but there are a lot of mosquitoes a
lot a lot a lot so we're kind of dying here check this out guys look beautiful
nature this city is really pet friendly  so if you have a dog, I recommend you to take him so, guys, this was Kazimierz Dolny
it's a really small but really nice city it's just two and a half hours from
Warsaw so I strongly recommend you to visit and well guys I hope you enjoy the
video if you liked it subscribe to my channel. I'm Chido-Fajnyand well see you
see you soon guys.|||what's up everyone welcome back to the channel and welcome back to another video have you ever wanted to visit krakow well today you're in luck because i'm going to be explaining my three-day itinerary of krakow for two people which you can use to adapt to create your own itinerary when you decide to buy that plane ticket and you should buy that plane ticket so we technically spent three nights and four days in krakow but the last day was more like a travel home day so that's why i've condensed this itinerary into three days and i'm also going to be telling up the cost of the entire trip to give you a rough idea of how much you need to budget for three days in this beautiful city this cost will be the cost for two people but just half it and you have your cost for one so i might be in the tropics tanning myself and sipping on exotic juices but let me take you back to the beginning of november on a cold winter's morning in london [Music] the air was chilly and our breath called up in front of our faces we had an early wake-up call at 3am making sure we had enough time for the 1.5 hour journey to the airport i'd fully recommend getting the earliest flight you can so that your first day there is a full day the trip there was painless we played 33 pounds for the airport car park and took a 10-minute shuttle bus to the airport terminal we headed straight for security and walked through without any issue i would always recommend an online check-in to avoid queues at the desk we stopped at a cafe rob could grab a coffee and do her makeup before heading to the gate to board the only re-entry requirements for uk citizens to enter poland at the time were to be fully vaccinated and to fill out a passenger locator form which was super easy the sunrise on the way though absolutely priceless the flight was just a short two hours before touching down in krakow and it was 35 pounds each return the bus took us to the terminal and getting through passport control was breezy we just had to show our vaccine qr codes the first bit of top quality travel advice i'll give is to get the bus to the old town and not a taxi a taxi driver came to us and offered us a taxi to the center for 10 euros but the bus ticket is only one pound seven for 60 minute ticket oh by the way i'm converting this on google at the time of recording which is around one gelato is 18p or about one pound is 5.61 so we rode the bus to the outskirts of krakow old town and picked a stop which would be an easy walk to the center the old town border is basically one big park which i thought was a nice touch also to note the public transport is pretty easy here if you use google maps to plan your trips trams run around the outside of the old town and further out into the city and are simple to use you just need to buy a ticket and stamp it in a machine when you get on after walking to the old town we spent some time exploring and enjoying the sites before we went on the hunt for a snack we found a nice little place called soroka cap that had some heating on we both got a juice and i got myself a tasty polish bagel roll couldn't eat anything on the menu so afterwards she went to starbucks to get herself a vegan drama with some food in our bellies we went out to explore more and found an old ornate church that was absolutely beautiful called the saint peter and paul church entry is free and you can even dive into the catacombs underneath where there are a bunch of tombs and informational signs walking further out took a survival royal castle and cathedral complex which you can purchase tickets online to go inside but we couldn't as they were sold out that day if you do decide to go here there are a lot of museums and buildings to explore head down the hill on the other side and you'll reach the riverfront this area is lovely for a walk or to relax and you will also find schmuck vervelskiy a statue of a dragon with many heads we took a long walk along the river and discovered that there are multiple maps across the city which are handy for tourists also you can hire golf buggy tours which should take you around the old town as well but we didn't do this it was then time to walk to our apartment for check-in we stayed in a flower residence apartment building and had a studio apartment to ourselves which was perfect for that short city break this accommodation cost us only 120 pounds for free nights rob had been wanting to go axe throwing on the lead up to this trip so she booked it for this evening for about 180 zlotar or 33 pound for an hour and a half that axe rang was less than a 10-minute walk from our apartment and the place that i can fully recommend the guy working there was an absolute hero spoke incredible english and was a top teacher he explained the technique like a pro would correct our errors and would be on standby whenever we needed him it was also bring your own bottle we both had an awesome time hitting and missing we played two games one where the goal was to reach certain amount of points first like darts and the other involved more precision where you had to hit certain areas of the target in a particular order safe to say i won every game at the end the guy taught us a few trick shots and made us look badass when we managed to hit the target with them and thus concluded our axe run experience we left badax throwing and went in search for our first night's dinner rob found a place called farmer on happy cow and i got myself a sub robin got a burger and we shared poutine and a couple of drinks for only 88 zlotar on the way back to our apartment we stopped at the store to grab a few things for the flat like cereal milk and juice as well as some quick snacks and then we went home for an early night to get ready for the solemn experience we were about to have the next day now if you've taken time to visit krakow before then you've probably found yourself visiting auschwitz which is where we decided to go on our second day the entire experience was very moving and the day was heavy but i definitely recommend it to everyone i honestly think it's somewhere everyone needs to go at least once it pays to remember history but honestly i'm not going to delve too much into the history on this video i just want to explain the process of how you can get to auschwitz and my experience of walking around the camp itself also be mindful there are areas that you aren't allowed to film or take photos so just watch out for these signs and be respectful of them and make sure you don't get your camera out in these areas i actually ended up filming this day on my phone because i didn't want to be walking around with a bulky camera and it was a lot easier and what i feel to be a lot more respectful just to have my phone out instead after a serial breakfast at the apartment we took a walk to the station located not far north east of krakow old town the bus we caught left the station at 11am sharp and it costed seven pounds each for a return ticket for a discover cracker you need to make sure that the tickets are printed as the driver does not accept a digital copy the journey itself took roughly an hour and a half and took us through a lot of the polish countryside which was interesting to see particularly the polish cemeteries which are full of flowers on every gravestone this is stark contrast to the uk where only newer burials would look this clean we arrived a bit early for our ticket entry so we explored the outside of the museum which had some information boards of stories and testimonies of a multitude of different families that had been victims of auschwitz each story was chilling to read now you may not know this but it is actually possible to get free tickets into auschwitz through their website austria.org these tickets are self-guided only which means you can go around at your own pace and you make your own way around the camp without a guide in contrast most people do get guided tours which are around 15 pound per person and they include travel to and from the museum you go in a group with a ton of other people and there will be a guy that takes you around the museum and will explain to you any information and answer any questions through a headset as they show you around the guided tours are not too expensive but we just felt like a self-guided tour and going at our own pace was more suited to the way that we wanted to visit however you do need to make sure you get a ticket either the free or the guided tour to guarantee your entry the ticket says to arrive 15 minutes early so at 1 pm we joined the queue to the museum entrance it was pretty long and unorganized but we finally got through the door through security and entered the camp there were signs posted all around the grounds that shared information of what life was like as a victim here most of the buildings have been converted into exhibitions and we decided to move at our own pace through them all the pictures and information they share invoke heavy feelings and thoughts about what tragedies occurred within these fences of auschwitz for me what hit home the most was the piles of discarded clothes and personal items that were confiscated from the victims on arrival it put into perspective the magnitude and the amount of people that once passed through auschwitz also walking through the gas chamber seeing the killing wall the emptiness of the camp and the multitude of warning signs around really adds the haunting feeling as you remember the history and the prisoners that were held here and that's all i'm going to say about the experience of walking around auschwitz you need to visit yourself and have your own experience as i think you should to grasp the magnitude and depth of the entire situation i'm going to continue this itinerary from after the tour of the museum i would recommend two to three hours here but it is also possible to do quicker and slower depending on how you want to experience the museum we left around quarter past three so we took around two and a half hours inside although our bus wasn't until ten past five we tried to catch a ten plus four bus but it only ran from friday to sunday so i definitely recommend researching the timetable before you book your bus tickets we took the dart right back to krakow and took a quick explore through the shopping center next to the bus station before walking to dinner rob found another vegan restaurant called no bones where we got some delicious dinner inside a funky looking restaurant we had udon fritters soup and a couple of beers before heading home to chill for an hour that evening we went to a bar rob discovered called cosmic bar which was three pounds each for entry and a ton of fun we got a couple of drinks each and spent hours playing the games and frolicking in the adult ball pit i would definitely recommend this place for a fun couple of hours out [Music] our third and final day in krakow was more like let's just do what we haven't done today day it was actually our busiest day in terms of activities and we were going pretty much non-stop the day started by heading to the old square with some bredwood pool and feeding the pigeons as far as i'm aware this is quite a popular thing to do as throughout the trip there are a ton of people and families feeling the birds i let rob had most of the fun while i filmed after the pigeons we took a walk down the market in the center of the square that was just opening the stores here were selling all sorts of merchandise and souvenirs and rob brought herself a magnet as she always does it for every place she goes to and we left next on my hit list was this place don't judge me i have this thing where i try mcdonald's in every country and then compare them all sue me after my cheeseburger i walked down the road and met robert starbucks we walked northwest to the museum of photographic history but unfortunately you couldn't just turn up and go in you had to book a time slot so we didn't manage to go in it is free though after this we paid for and hopped on the tram and took the 20 minute or so journey to the jewish quarter on the other side of the city when we arrived we went to the jewish square which we explored a bit and then went into the old synagogue that had been converted into a bookshop it was interesting here and displayed books and cds from all different languages we came across an israeli hummus bar and stopped here for lunch i had a homemade hummus and pita plate which was gorgeous and rob got herself a raspberry lemonade we demolished lunch like ravenous wolves explored the square some more and then bimbled over the bridge to the jewish ghetto a place where the nazis used to exploit the local jewish polls during the second world war again i'm not going to delve into too much of the history in this itinerary after a quick visit to a segment of the jewish ghetto wall which was still standing we headed to the nearby schindler's factory in a couple of days leading up to this we did try to get tickets to schindler's factory but we couldn't find tickets anywhere i think it's only open on certain days so you need to research this before you go there are a bunch of people all outside taking photos and reading the information boards but no one seems to be going in the museum we caught a tram back to where the bus station was and i grabbed the traditional polish donut and we stumbled across a cat caf that rob forced me inside it was nice enough here there was no entry freeze but we did buy a drink although the catchers did what cats do and kept themselves themselves and as per the rules we weren't allowed to bother them unless they came to us which they never did rock some lunch at a vega burger place called kravaskova treating herself to a wrap and some nachos and then we paid to climb the clock tower it was a very tight squeeze climbing up the stairs with people coming back down but on the way up our floors were small exhibitions that depicted the history of the old town square when we reached the top you got panoramic views of krakow which was stunning to see and the clock tower bell mechanism sat in the middle of the room i recommend coming up here just to see all the vistas of cracker the climb back down was steep but once out we went to an entertainment place to walk past on the first day it had a mirror maze vr roller coaster and a room full of lights it was a bit of a gimmick but actually we had a lot of fun here for five pounds each and i would recommend it we managed to squeeze in one last touristy thing on this day and visited rene underground museum we actually discovered that you could get the underground museum and the clock tower in a combo ticket if you just went to the ticket office outside the old square market it made it a little bit cheaper but unfortunately we missed out on this because we've done the clock tower earlier rinic underground museum is an interactive and educational place that lies under the old square it surprised me to learn that the square was actually excavated in 2009 and the relics and foundations found underneath were converted into this museum in 2010 it's 100 worth of visit on the way to dinner we stopped at a vegan bakery and got some snacks for our journey home the next day and then we went to a place to try some traditional pierogi which were absolutely delicious at a place called pierogi totu i would recommend coming here to try them and they do vegan ones as well on the last evening we tried to find a rooftop bar and failed we found a lesser known one in the krakow music academy building but it shut 30 minutes before we got there so we found a nice craft bar in the jewish quarter for a quick beer and stopped in a funky pub called the dog in the fog before heading home and calling us a night day four consisted of us getting two buses back to the airport and flying home at around 11am and that concludes our three-day identity krakow there are other things to do here such as schindler's factory the salt mines and a multitude of other museums but i feel like we managed to see most of krakow in just three days and this itinerary is a good basis for you to start building yours off if you're planning a long weekend here we tried to cover some popular locations as well as some lesser known locations as well tallying up the cost of this trip we spent 428 pound or 2310 zlotar for three action-packed days in cracker so around 214 pounds each for this trip now by no means did we do this cheaply and we also didn't splurge too much but it's obviously possible to spend much more or say if you're drinking or going to more expensive restaurants and you can still do it a lot cheaper as well if you go to the convenience stores or the supermarkets and buy food there take it home and make your own meals throughout the day but i think we found a nice middle ground between expensive and cheap so i really hope you found this video useful for your upcoming trip and i've added some value because that's what i always like to try and do on this channel feel free to follow me on instagram or twitter and dm me any questions you may have because i'm always happy to answer them but for now it would really help me out if you subscribed maybe hit the like button and left a comment for me as i'm always hanging around the comments section and i like to reply to them all in the meantime i hope you have a great day and i'll see you in the next one|||although Poland hosts one of the tiniest Muslim 
minorities in the whole world you have Muslim   families who have been settled in Poland since 
the 14th century, so it is, at the same time, one   of the oldest Muslim minorities in Europe. hello 
and welcome my name is William and today I wanted   to share with you about Muslims in my parents 
country, Poland. when I embraced Islam in 2008 my   parents would still go to Poland visit family. 
I needed to figure out where I'm gonna pray,   where I'm gonna find a mosque or halal meat 
then I stumbled upon the Wikipedia page and   I thought to myself: "I didn't know that" and I want 
to tell the word about this. I decided back then to   produce my very first documentary which you can 
find for free on YouTube called polish Muslims   and unexpected meeting. back then, the main 
right-wing narrative was that Muslims are not   welcome in Europe because they were never part of 
it. they do not belong to Europe. the fact that you   have Muslims settled in Poland since the 14th 
century was a magnificent counter-argument. when   I went to meet Muslims in Poland, I went to three 
different areas. I went of course to the capital   city Warszawa, then I went to Katowice which is 
in Slask, in Silesia, which was a very   industrial region of Poland and the birthplace 
of my dad, eventually I went to Bialystok in   the northeastern part of the country. Muslims 
in Poland are made of three main   demographics. first the largest population is made 
of all different kinds of people who arrived in   Poland in the 20th century: people from North 
Africa the Middle East and later on West Africa,   Turkey, South Asia and also lots of Muslims 
coming from the Kawkas: Dagestan, Chechnya and so   on. and thanks to them, Poland has become the first 
and largest exporter of halal meat across Europe.   second are the numerous Poles who embraced Islam 
at some point in their lives. Third are the Tatars   this is the oldest Muslim Community in Poland.
Tatars are tukric people who originated from Crimea   and came to Poland in the 14th century to offer 
their military services to the Duke of Poland   Lithuania at the time. To thank them for their 
services, the Duke of Poland Lithuania, Prince   Witold, offered the Tatars land and the right to 
practice their religion. since then, you will find   in the northeastern part of Poland so around 
the city of Bialystok mosques and Cemeteries   which are 300 400 years old and have very distinct 
look. the highlight of my trip was meeting with the   tatars obviously because the first thing is when 
you look at the mosques, the way they are built, is   very similar to the way people used to build  
churches. the rituals might differ a little bit   from what people are used to see in Western Europe, 
for example is the concept of sadoga. I went to   Poland for Ramadan and I spent Eid in in Poland 
and at that time after the Eid khutba (sermon) people would   leave sweets on the minbar on the mosque, and this 
is called sadoga which comes from the word sadaqa   you may have guessed. Because of Communism many 
Tatars had to hide their religiosity to the point   where people even adopted Christian sounding names 
to hide for example Ali would become Alexander and   like many Muslims you would find in Central Asia 
part of the ex-communist block countries, for many   people Islam has now become nothing more than a 
cultural heritage so you will see people who are   proud to be Muslim but people who are also happy 
to drink some vodka. and there was a point because   of Communism where these historic mosques would 
open only 14 times a year twice for Eid and 12   times because there was one Juma per month. 
and thanks to the influx of migrants from the   Middle East and other parts of the world now the 
younger Generations are starting to reconnect with   their faith and tradition so you would see younger 
tatars who wear the hijab for example, while it was   not the case for their parents generation. when 
it comes to other groups of Muslims and because   there is very few mosques in Poland what was 
heartwarming is unlike some Western European   countries, in the mosque you would find a huge 
diversity of people people from very different   cultures, ethnicities, social economic backgrounds. 
people speaking all sorts of languages and the   khutba would be in Polish. sadly you will have 
some political divisions when it comes to the   representation of Muslims in Poland specifically 
between the Muslim League which is made of people   who mainly arrived in Poland in the 20th century 
so the majority and group of Muslims and between   the Tatars who claim a right for representation 
because they are the oldest demographic of Muslims   in Poland. also the Tatars are an officially 
recognized minority by the government and every   year there is a commemoration of their military 
services to the country. and since I've made my   documentary in 2012, 2013 things have changed 
in Poland and and the far right has taken over   with a very strong anti-muslim narrative and 
shortly after I left I read the news and so   the mosques being burned people being attacked 
on the streets so life has become slightly more   difficult for Muslims in Poland. one striking 
example of how people try to go low profile   now is this kiosk this small Kebab shop in the 
center of Warszawa which was called "salaam alaikum   kebab" and I thought back in the days, that was 
really really a bold idea to call your Kebab   shop like this in the middle of Warszawa and then so 
I've returned to Warszawa last year and in the in   the center of the city and now salaam alaikum 
Kebab has become hello Kebab. if you want to   know more about Muslims in Poland I invite you 
to have a look at this documentary I produced    now 10 years ago which is freely available on 
YouTube polish Muslims documentary just type in on   YouTube it will appear in the meantime thank 
you for watching and take care of each other|||PHIL BLACK, CNN, ESTONIA. >>> U.S. SOLDIERS OFFICIALLY  WELCOMED AT THE OPENING CEREMONY IN POLAND, WHERE THE PRIME  MINISTER CALLED IT A GREAT DAY. GIVE US YOUR ASSESSMENT OF THE  DEPLOYMENT AND IT'S IMPORTANCE? >> I HAVE BEEN INVOLVED IN IT  SINCE THE BEGINNING WHEN I WAS  STILL WEARING THE UNIFORM, AND  WE STARTED THE PLANNING FOR THIS IN 2004 AS WE TKPWPB THE  DRAWDOWN OF THE SIZE OF THE  FORCE IN EUROPE, AND THE SIZE OF THE U.S. FORCE IN EUROPE. THERE WERE 100,000 SOLDIERS IN  EUROPE IN THE LATE 1990s, AND  THERE'S ABOUT 30,000 PERMANENTLY STATIONED THERE NOW. THIS ROTATIONAL BRIGADE IS A  CRITICAL PART OF REINFORCING AND REINSURING OUR ALLIES, AND WHAT  IS GOING ON WITH RUSSIA, THEY  HAVE A STRATEGY OF UNDERMINING  THE COMPETENCE THAT THE NATO  NATIONS HAVE IN THE ARTICLE 5  PROCEDURES, AND THAT ARTICLE 5  IS IF ONE NATION ATTACKED,  OTHERS WILL COME TO THEIR AID. THIS REASSURANCE IS SAYING TO  NATO, WE WILL BE THERE FOR YOU  AND IT'S IMPORTANT AND IT HAS  BEEN GOING ON FOR THE LAST  SEVERAL YEARS, BUT THIS IS THE  FIRST TIME WE HAVE STATIONED  SOLDIERS IN POLAND ITSELF. >> HOW DO YOU THINK THIS MOVE BY PRESIDENT OBAMA MAY SHAPE WHAT  DONALD TRUMP DOES MOVING  FORWARD? >> WELL, AGAIN, THIS HAS BEEN IN THE WORKS FOR A WHILE, AND THIS  WAS NOT GEARED TOWARD THE  INAUGURATION AND WHAT IS GOING  ON THIS MONTH WITH OUR POLITICS, AND IT HAS TO DO WITH  REINFORCING NATO. IT WILL GIVE THE TRUMP  ADMINISTRATION A LITTLE TIME TO  CONSIDER THIS AS HE TALKS TO OUR EUROPEAN ALLIES AND GETS A  FIRMER GRIP ON WHAT GOES ON IN  NATO, SO IT WILL BE IMPORTANT TO HAVE THESE 5,000 ADDITIONAL  TROOPS CONDUCTING EXERCISES IN  KEY NATO COUNTRIES. >> LET'S LISTEN TO THE POLISH  PRIME MINISTER AND WHAT HE HAD  TO SAY. >> Translator: THIS IS VERY  IMPORTANT FOR POLAND AND THE  REGION AND WE LIVE IN EUROPE  WHERE RUSSIAN POLICY IS  CONTROVERSIALAL, AND THIS  CONSTITUTE A THREAT AND WE ARE  CONS CONSCIOUS. >> SHE POINTS OUT AT THE END OF  THE DAY, IF THERE IS A WARMING  BETWEEN THE U.S. AND RUSSIA IN  SOME CAPACITY, THAT PUTS POLAND  IN A DELICATE POSITION? >> A WARMING WOULD BE A GOOD  THING, AND ALL HISTORICAL  RELATIONS ARE THAT PUTIN HAS A  STRATEGY AND WE HAVE TO  UNDERSTAND THIS. IT'S NOT WHETHER YOU LIKE OR  DISLIKE A PERSON, AND IT HAS TO  DO WITH HIS STRATEGY FOR THE  COUNTRY OF RUSSIA, AND PHIL  BLACK MENTIONED THE ISSUE WITH  LITHUANIA, AND THEY HAD TO FIGHT FOR THEIR FREEDOM IN 1990. GOOGLE LITHUANIA, AND THERE WERE CITIZENS LITERALLY APPROACHING  RUSSIAN TANKS WITH THEIR FISTS  IN THEIR TOWN SQUARES, AND THEY  WANT THEM OUT. THIS IS A GOOD THING FOR THE  NATO COUNTRIES, AND POLAND AND  THE POLITICS JOINED NATO IN 2004 AND THEY WANT TO SEE ASSURANCES  THEY WILL BE DEFENDED UNDER  ARTICLE 5. >> EARLIER IN THE WEEK, MATTIS  SAID HE SUPPORTS NATO AND THAT  IS SOMETHING THAT GOES AGAINST  THE GRAIN OF WHAT  PRESIDENT-ELECT TRUMP SAID. WHAT DO YOU MAKE OF THAT  RELATIONSHIP? >> GENERAL MATTIS SAID HE NOT  ONLY SUPPORTS NATO, AND HE SAID  IF NATO WAS NOT IN EXISTENCE NOW WE WOULD HAVE TO CREATE IT, AND  THAT'S A HUGE STATEMENT ON THE  GUY GETTING PART OF THE  SECRETARY OF DEFENSE WHAT  COUNTERS WHAT TRUMP SAID DURING  HIS ENTIRE CAMPAIGN. NATO IS AN IMPORTANT ALLIANCE  AND WE HAVE TO KEEP IT STRONG,  AND IT HAS TRANSFORMED ORR ITS  YEARS TO ADDRESS ITS THREAT  TODAY UNLIKE WHAT MR. TRUMP|||[Music] the devastation of be Burress principalities and Eastern Europe under Suba tie and baton was one of the most expertly orchestrated campaigns of the Mongols though they withdrew early in 1242 this was not the end of their interactions with Europe in this video we will present the return of Mongol armies to Hungary and Poland through the lens of the rise and fall of the Mongol general no guy did you know that we have a podcast we do it's called Ages of conquest a kings and Generals podcast and it is quite good in our humble opinion recently we finished our series on the Wars of the diadochi of Alexander and started a new season on the history of the Mongols the first two episodes are already out and we're planning 50 or so more each episode will expand on our videos so it's a must listen if you're interested in Mongol history you can find our podcast on every podcast out there or via the link in the description it would mean the world to us if you would consider subscribing and rating the podcast after withdrawing from the wreckage of the Hungarian Kingdom in 1242 Batou made his encampment in the Volga step while Hungary and Poland were left outside of the Empire Bulgaria and the roost princes were now vassals of the Great Khan Batou was important in the Ascension of mon coeur in 1248 and sources of the period portray bear to as Mon coeurs Viceroy of the West though he continued to live as a nomad Batou built a capital Sarai on the lower Volga River the vast steppe lands around it serving as the heart of his empire the devastated Rus cities were of little importance as of yet the great wealth to be had was by control of the Overland trade routes and their access points such as the Black Sea ports and the Caucasus with bad news death in 12:55 and the sudden death of his son Tsar tank and grandson Alexei his brother burka became town burka was a convert to Islam at this time still uncommon within the Jochen territories certainly his religion played a role in the souring of relations between burka and his cousin Hulagu when the latter destroyed baghdad in 1258 but conflicts did not break out until 1262 filagot seizure of the caucasian territories and as a per Johnny pastures and the murder of Judge it Prince's in his retinue in February of 1260 on pretenses of sorcery were the immediate cassis belly indeed it was the son of one of these executed princes who led the retaliation Nagai a great-grandson of jockey born to a concubine in around 12:40 no guy could not become calm and focused his energies on the military he converted to Islam at a similar time to burka and became a human commander with 30,000 men burka and no guy marched to avenge no guy's father tutor taking derbent in summer 1262 in camping outside Shivan Hulagu sent first his Vanguard under Sherman no Yan before setting out with his main army in August while another ill canid force under some eager and Abbott I approached no guy destroyed Sherman's army in mid-october but was forced to flee after an encounter with Sam eager and Abbot I when Hulagu learned of no guys flight he marched to Shema key where he forced berker to withdraw by December Burke and no guy retreated past Derbent leaving a contingent to man that mighty fortress though it fell quickly to the ilkhanate forces on the 7th of December and they continued to pursue Burke and Nauheim on the 15th no guy suffered a major defeat at the hands of Sherman Noah Abbott I and Hulagu son Ibaka seeing no guy withdraw to the steppe Abbott I and Sherman urged tobacco to return to his father but the Prince declined with reinforcements sent by Hulagu he followed the Joads trail finding burkas abandoned camp on the north bank of the frozen Terek River tents herds treasures and families abandoned in their haste for three days Ibaka's men celebrated their victory they had however stumbled into a trap on the 13th of January 1263 Burke and Nagai returned catching Ibaka's men unprepared the ilkhanate forces flew across the frozen river but under their weight the ice broke beneath them Ibaka escaped back to his father and burka retook derbent Kublai Khan was unable to prevent the continued conflict between the now independent Golden Horde and the L Carnot Hulagu died in 1265 and was succeeded by Ibaka an opportunity for burka to secure the caucuses no guys set out with a large army from Derbent in early summer 1265 in late July or August no guy was met by a force under Rebecca's brother Joe Schmidt on the axle River in modern Azerbaijan an arrow took no guy's eye and his army was defeated with heavy losses withdrawing to Shivan meanwhile both ibaka Khan and burka Khan arrived with reinforcements forming up on banks across the curry river shooting arrows at each other but unable to forge the river for 14 days they waited until burka moves towards the Georgian capital of tiflis but fell ill and died enroute leading to a general withdrawal to suraíh this time a backhoe did not pursue but built a wall and ditch along the north bank of the kuru river losing his father is I his Khan and several battles Nagai moved west to the land between the kneestr and the Danube rivers Berger was succeeded by batas grandson mon coeur temer who consolidated the golden horde issuing coins in his own name and conducting a census he granted the Orthodox Church in ruse exemption from taxation and it became a staunch ally in upholding Mongol rule campaigns were largely halted against the AL Carnot though he maintained good relations with the man looks and meddled in the affairs of Central Asia briefly assisting the rising Kaidu mon coeur Timbers relationship with Nagai wasn't as strong as it had been with burka though he entitled him as the bailer bay and largely left no guy to his own affairs returning to Eastern Europe we will briefly mention development since the 1240s the Mongol withdrawal gave Bella the fourth breathing room and he started building up the defences of his kingdom encouraging the nobility to build stone castles west of the Danube and on the kingdom's northeastern borders the now depopulated Hungarian plain he gave to the commands his allies through a marriage alliance between his son Stefan and their Khan's daughter marriage ties were also established with a number of his neighbors but his requests for aid from the Pope fell on deaf ears and he fought with king ottokar the second of Bohemia the inheritor of the Austrian babban Berg territory in 1253 the westernmost worst principalities Galicia and valina declared their independence from the Mongols under Prince Daniel romanovitch Daniel was crowned king of Ruthenia by people on voice but that crown was all the aid he'd received from the West and it brought the Mongols attention initial efforts by the general khemsa to assert authority over Daniel were unsuccessful until burkha replaced khemsa with the commander baron de a veteran who had distinguished himself during the invasion of Patton in 1259 burundi entered galicia daniil fleeing to poland and then Hungary in Daniel's absence his brother Basilico and son Lev submitted to Baron die who ordered the destruction of the fortifications of kaliesha and for Linea also in 1259 burkas own voice reached Bella the fourth demanding his military assistance and a marriage Alliance Bella used the threat to try to leverage the Pope into providing him aid which the papacy declined which forced the King to nominally submit to the Mongols appeasing them with tribute it would certainly explain why when Aaron died asserted the hordes suzerainty over kaliesha bulimia he left Hungary unscathed while he marched into Poland in November 12 59 it is unknown how many men were ruined I brought with him but his Mongol and Turkic horsemen were reinforced by a sizeable Galician Valene e'en contingent under vasilica romanovitch ver and i bypassed Lublin and savvy coast crossing the vistula river and began ravaging Polish territory his army came to San Damir surrounding and enclosing it with a stockade trapping the citizens within missiles were held at the defenses for three days with so many arrows the defenders were unable to even peer over the walls by the fourth day ladders brought the Mongols into the city the inhabitants fled to the key but on the narrow drawbridge many fell to their deaths into the moat though seeking shelter in the town's church were trapped as fire spread and whoever survives the conflagration was driven out onto the plain before the city and slaughtered by April 1260 the rend eyes army withdrew prisoners and loot in tow a Mongol attack is recorded on Lithuania and Prussia in the same year inflicting heavy losses on the Teutonic Knights and it may have been that mirandize forces brought fire and ruin there as well Europe was largely spared in the 12 60s due to the burqa Hulagu war aside from a brief campaign in 1264 Michael the eighth pelea logos restored Byzantine rule in Constantinople in 1261 only to find himself sandwiched between the O carnitine Anatolia and the golden horde in the Balkans seeing the ill Khan's as the more immediate threat he sent an illegitimate daughter to be married to Hulagu Khan imprisoned the Celtic Sultan kick-ass ii and detained Mamluk envoys travelling to the golden horde burka wanted the Bosphorus open and with assistance from the Bulgarian Tsar Constantine tick sent an army into Thrace rescuing the Sultan in 1264 and sending Emperor Michael fleeing to Constantinople when no guy came to the region in the late 12th he was to become the main conduit for contacts between the carnot and the Byzantine Empire after his arrival no guys forces were invited to attack Emperor Michael on behalf of his enemy Joan of Thessaly and no guy's army plundered Thrace in late 1271 Emperor Michael couldn't defeat these Raiders in the field so he won upped his Thessaly an enemy in 1272 he organized a marriage alliance marrying another one of his illegitimate daughters who frozen a to no guy and granted him the title of Archon no guy didn't care for the gifts of the Byzantines but he did make good on the requirements of the marriage Alliance prohibiting his forces and those of the Bulgarians from attacking the Byzantines further it lays the foundation for na guys own regional ambition the death of mon coeur Timur Khan in 1280 succeeded by his weaker brother toda monka removed the only figure who held a leash on no guy in 1282 Michael the eighth died while preparing to meet up with no guy to march against Jonathas le and was succeeded by his less capable son and Johnny cost the second this left no guy the senior figure of southeastern Europe the new Bulgarian Tsar George tirta recognized no guys overlordship in 1284 sending his sons fetish lavas hostage and marrying his daughter - no guys son checker no guy cast his influence further afield sending Buddhist relics to the Ilkka noggin and continuing his own diplomacy with the Mamluks he provided troops and ordered lithuanian reinforcements for lev danilevich of kaliesha for líneas unsuccessful campaign into Poland in 1218 he increasingly meddled in the politics of the Golden Horde Toto Mong Kok are deposed Alexander Nevsky son Dmitry as Grand Prince in 1280 giving the title to demetrius brother by 1280 - naga assisted dmitri in retaking the princely title no guys representatives demanded less taxes than the cons which encouraged immigration into his territory to the chagrin of roost princes who saw their tax base running away from them sending a formal complaint to totem Unga Khan who did nothing by 1285 no guys attention was drawn to Hungary here despite the command leanings of king ladislaus the forth himself of cumin descent a cumin uprising rocked the kingdom culminating in a battle on lake hart in 1282 the Kumar's who escaped fled to no guy and urged him to act seeing one of the main lines of Hungary's defense having fled and hearing of the poor relationship between young king ladislaus and his barons no guy must have thought Hungary an easy target together with the ambitious prince teller Booker no guys set out for Hungary these sources provide little detail on this campaign but it is clear that this was not on the scale of 1241 intended not for conquest but to pillage left and heal of each of Galicia bulimia was ordered to supply troops but attacks by the Polish Duke let the black kept him from doing so no guy and tiller bukas army augmented by other rus princes likely traveled through Galician controlled transcarpathia entering the hungarian kingdom in february 1285 through the northeastern shower and step h counties the mongol army split sometime after cutting across the Northeast and raiding as far as the environs of Buda and pest the Mongols did not come prepared for sieges and bypassed heavily fortified points no guy likely intended to use the maneuverability of his forces to stay ahead of the Hungarian main army moving quickly and apparently dividing his men into small regiments to raid but since the 1240s Hungary had seen a growth in the number of parodies rather than a main army raised against them the mongols were confronted by local defensive forces wherever they moved by breaking his forces off as he had he allowed them to be overwhelmed in local engagements one defender with particular success was a master Jorge founder of the Chernobyl house in Shiraz County who with his own locally raised forces overcame Mongol troops several times and sent their severed heads to king ladislaus though the mongols were faced by stiff resistance they were able to capture their share of prisoners and loot the sources indicate famine hunger and sickness among the Mongols no guy until Ibuka must have decided to cut their losses and withdraw moving east in two main forces by the end of march 1285 no guy's army moved through Transylvania but found the local people's Saxons blacks and Sekulow cavalry blocking the passages inflicting serious reverses on Mongol parties and freeing a large number of prisoners an army under king ladislaus further harassed their retreat tella bukas army tried to cross the Carpathian Mountains but the spring weather rain snow and hail destroyed the roads before them forcing them to go off the main routes many were lost in the mountains starving or freezing to death or helped to the same end by the locals it was an ignominious end to the campaign though losses were likely exaggerated on no guys returned to his territory in 1285 he led an expansion into debreu Xia and the Danube Delta taking his Exia and making it his capital in 1287 totum Anka was deposed by a group of Jochen princes who appointed no guys comrade till Ibuka as khan in december 1287 no guy and tell Ibuka marched into Poland to punish Duke Leszek for the earlier defeat of left Anila and leisure ex raids on Galicia Valley Nia no guy and tell Ibuka entered the country separately till Ibuka across the frozen Vistula and made an effort to takes and Emir the defenders had learned from 1259 till Ibuka was forced back and march to crack off there he found no guy had invested the city since christmas frustrated by no guy and his own defeats till Ibuka abandoned the campaign pillaging through poland and his vassal gallaecia Varinia on the way home the defenders of Krakov fought bravely and no guy could only ravage the city's outskirts before he too withdrew in February 12 88 for their valiant defense Duke Leszek granted Krakov tax exemptions Nagai bling to tell Ibuka for the defeat and began looking to undermine the con he did not have long to wait monka temer son doctor was targeted by till Ibuka and his allies and fled seeking no guy's assistance no guy told him to prepare an army while he pretended to fall deathly ill and made his way to tell Ibuka seemingly about to die he summoned till Ibuka and his princess to his camera and while cuffing up blood clots he had previously swallowed he urged the princess to make peace with him before his death with their guard let down by the old man smooth-talked doctor arrived with his forces and killed the princes by 1291 doctor was Khan of the Golden Horde no guy returned to his or due and expanded he appointed a puppet Bulgarian Tsar millets and forced the Serbian King Stefan militant to accept him as overlord and sent his son Stefan as hostage to no guys court in exact year he was minting coins in his own name his direct control in the golden horde stretched past the kneestr towards crimea and he ordered the deaths of rival george it princes and officials resistance was growing within the Horde - no guys ambitions and no guy and dr. Khan were soon butting heads over influence over the ruse with tensions building the spark came when no guy demanded doctor hand over his own father-in-law tox have refused and nor guy declared his independence declaring himself Khan in 1296 in late 1297 on the banks of the ax a river off the lowered on their armies met with over 40 years experience as a commander no guy had the better of this first engagement defeating and routing doctors army doctor fled but no guy failed to pursue in Crimea no guy's grandson had been killed trying to collect tribute and no guy was determined to avenge him seizing katha and other cities but spreading his forces thin several princes on the lower Dnieper rebelled and while no guy's sons crushed them other Prince's deserted to talk to who in the meantime had called up reserves from the east and the border with the opponent no guys sent messages to the ilk on ghazan hoping for his intervention but while in suraíh doctor had organized a truce with gazan allowing doctor to bring up those border units no guy realized he had outplayed his hand and withdrew to his own territory in the face of a full invasion by doctor in 1299 with as many as 60,000 horseman bearing down on him late last year no guy was caught on the southern Boog River while the army stood before each other the old dog tried one last trick he sent a messenger to talkto telling him he was a sick old man and put the blame on his sons for the fighting while he sent his son Chaka upstream to flank dr. dr. scouts alerted him and ordered an assault on no guys tired army which shattered fleeing with 17 horsemen no guys troop was charged by a group of Roose cavalry and he was severely wounded captured he told I am no guy take me to talkto for he is the Khan he began to be led away but died of his injuries before he reached doctor thus ended the reign of Naga Khan [Music] his sons continued to be a nuisance in the area for several years his son Chaka briefly taking control of Bulgaria but the last of the Nuggets were soothed crushed it is this period the rule of the Mongols over the ruse and the ultimate collapse of the Golden Horde which we will examine in the next video so make sure you are subscribed to our Channel and have pressed the bell button we would like to express our gratitude to our patreon supporters and channel members who make the creation of our videos possible now you can also support us by buying our merchandise by the link in the description this is the kings and Generals channel and we will catch you on the next one|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||BREAKING NEWS OUT OF THE WAR IN  UKRAINE. RUSSIA LAUNCHING A MAJOR MISSILE ATTACK IN CITIES ACROSS UKRAINE  AND A REPORT A MISSILE CROSSED  INTO NATO TERRITORY KILLING TWO  PEOPLE IN POLAND. GREG PALKOT IS LIVE IN KYIV. WHAT DO WE KNOW AND WHAT ARE THE POTENTIAL IMPLICATIONS? >> JOHN, THIS IS THE HUGE  SIGNIFICANT EVENT THAT WE ARE  JUST TRACKING JUST THE LAST  COUPLE OF MINUTES. ACCORDING TO A SENIOR U.S.  OFFICIAL AND ACCORDING TO  REPORTS ON THE GROUND, A RUSSIAN MISSILE FIRED FROM SOMEWHERE OFF OF UKRAINE WENT INTO UKRAINE AIR SPACE BUT THEN VEERED INTO  EASTERN POLAND AND ACTUALLY HIT  A TARGET, NOT A TARGET, BUT A  SITE IN EASTERN POLAND KILLING  TWO PEOPLE. FIRST TIME SOMETHING LIKE THIS  HAS HAPPENED. THIS TRIGGERS ALL SORTS OF  QUESTIONS ABOUT WHAT THE  REACTION COULD BE FROM NATO. I THINK WE ALL KNOW NOW ABOUT  THAT ARTICLE 5 OF NATO THAT ANY  ATTACK ON AN ALLY OF THE UNITED  STATES OF A NATO MEMBER WOULD  TRIGGER SOME KIND OF RESPONSE  FROM NATO. SO BREAKING NEWS IN THE LAST TEN MINUTES OR SO. WE ARE TRACKING IT, WE'LL GIVE  YOU MORE AS WE KNOW ABOUT IT. BUT YES, LET'S TALK ABOUT THE  HUGE BARRAGE OF MISSILES THAT  HIT UKRAINE TODAY. THE BIGGEST BARRAGE OF THIS  ENTIRE WAR. WE HEARD A FEW HOURS AGO THE AIR RAID SIRENS. WE HEARD EXPLOSIONS. TAKE A LOOK AT WHAT WE SAW. >> WHAT HAPPENED IS A RUSSIAN  MISSILE WAS FLYING OVER THIS  RESIDENTIAL AREA, IT WAS SHOT BY UKRAINIAN AIR DEFENSES, SOME  FRAGMENTS HIT THAT BUILDING,  CAUSED A HOLE, A LOT OF DAMAGE  AND THEN PIECES OF THAT MISSILE  FELL DOWN INTO THE STREET. YOU CAN SEE IT RIGHT HERE BEING  TAKEN AWAY BY OFFICIALS. >> INCREDIBLE STUFF. THE FIRE RAGED FROM THE BUILDING FOR A LONG TIME. ONE PERSON WAS KILLED, ONE  INJURED. WE WERE AT THE SCENE. WE CAN'T BELIEVE THE CASUALTY  TOLL WAS NOT HIGHER. OVER 90 MISSILES WERE FIRED BY  RUSSIA IN THE DIRECTION OF  UKRAINE FROM ALL SIDES. UKRAINE SAYS IT SHOT DOWN AROUND 70, BUT THE REST GOT THROUGH. ONCE AGAIN, THOSE HITTING POWER  STATIONS IN OTHER PARTS OF THE  ELECTRIC GRID HERE, AND KNOCKED  OUT POWER ALL OVER, MILLIONS  TONIGHT IN KYIV AND THE COUNTRY  ARE WITHOUT ELECTRICITY. PRESIDENT'S OFFICE SAID IT WAS  RUSSIA'S RESPONSE TO ZELENSKYY'S MESSAGE TO THE G20 SUMMIT SAYING RUSSIA NEEDS TO WITHDRAW, AND  OTHERS THINK IT WAS FROM THE  TAKING OF KHERSON. BUT THE BREAKING NEWS FOLLOWING  HERE, JOHN AND SANDRA,  POTENTIALLY IMMENSELY  SIGNIFICANT. LOOKS LIKE ONE OF THOSE  MISSILES, ACCORDING TO A U.S.  OFFICIAL, ASSOCIATED PRESIDENT  IS REPORTING, WE DO NOT HAVE IT  YET CONFIRMED FROM POLISH  AUTHORITIES, IT SEEMS LIKE ONE  OF THOSE RUSSIAN MISSILES  STRAYED ACROSS THE BORDER  BETWEEN UKRAINE AND POLAND, HIT  A SITE IN POLAND, APPARENTLY A  CIVILIAN SITE THERE, BUT KILLING TWO PEOPLE. WE UNDERSTAND THE POLISH  GOVERNMENT IS IN EMERGENCY  SESSION NOW TAKING A LOOK AT  THIS. WE'LL BE WATCHING IT AS THE DAY  DEVELOPS. BACK TO YOU GUYS. >> John: THINKING ABOUT THE  POTENTIAL REPERCUSSIONS, POLAND  IS A NATO MEMBER, NATO HAS  ARTICLE 5, ATTACK AGAINST ONE IS ATTACK AGAINST ALL, IS THIS  SOMETHING THAT COULD POTENTIALLY RISE TO ARTICLE 5 LEVEL OR DO  YOU THINK THIS IS SOMETHING THAT WILL BE CONTAINED JUST IN THE  POLISH GOVERNMENT, A STRONG  RESPONSE TOWARD RUSSIA AND NOT  MUCH ELSE? >> WE CAN'T PREDICT THAT AT THIS POINT, BUT CERTAINLY THROUGHOUT  THIS ENTIRE WAR AND PRIOR TO  THIS WAR, PRIOR TO  FEBRUARY 24TH, THAT HAS BEEN THE RISK. THAT HAS BEEN THE DANGER THAT  THE U.S. AND NATO ALLIES HAVE  BEEN VERY CONCERNED ABOUT. NATO HAS BEEN WORKED HARD TO  PREVENT THIS WAR FROM HAPPENING  ESSENTIALLY BECAUSE OF THIS KIND OF DANGER, AND IT HAS FLATLY  STATED BEFORE AND DURING, DURING THIS WAR, THAT IF RUSSIA DECIDED TO INTENTIONALLY ATTACK ANY NATO ALLY, THERE WOULD BE A NATO  RESPONSE AND FRANKLY, ACCORDING  TO THE NATO CHARTER, THAT COULD  BE VERY STRONG. IS THIS AN INTENTIONAL ATTACK, A MISTAKE, WE WILL SEE AGAIN IN  THE NEXT HOUR AS WE ARE WAITING  FOR A RESPONSE F|||DEX: My name in Second Life is Dex Euromat. The Poland History House is located in Region
Madhupak. This region belongs to the Chilbo educational
community. DRAX: Nice, a very international neighborhood. DEX: One of my neighbors is a German castle
and also a Venezuelan diaspora project. There are some libraries and we have the annual
Virtual World's MOOC Headquarters. DRAX: All right. So let's check out the Poland History House. DEX:The main exhibition is on the first floor. You have 74 dates from history from the beginning
around 800 AD to 2018. DRAX: And this interactive map here? DEX: These are the Polish borders through
time. DRAX: Very cool. DEX: We also have a roof floor which contains
Polish inventors and inventions holodeck. For example, let's go with the Apollo Lunar Rover. DRAX:Wow! DEX: It was constructed by many immigrants
in USA. Most of the technical parts were made by team
lead by Mr Mieczysław Bekker. DRAX: And you build all this with prims too. Can you show me another one? DEX: We had a man named Czochralski who
invented the modern way of making transistors. DRAX: That's awesome Dex. I have to show this to my dad who is a retired
engineer! Time for one more. DEX: This scene showcases one of our chemists
Ignacy Łukasiewicz. He made the first in the world raffination of crude oil to kerosene and then naphtalene. John D. Rockefeller himself came to Poland
before he started the oil industry in USA. He got all info from here. DRAX: So the build is all yours but also the
scripting, right? DEX: Yes, most things here I scripted myself. Second Life has a vast library. You can take a free example and change it
to your own needs. I wanted to have it simple but informative. DRAX: Thank you, Dex for this wonderful overview. Is there anything you’d like to add? DEX: The Poland History House is open for
everyone and I can provide guided tour if required, DRAX: I am quite certain a lot of folks will
take you up on that offer!|||good morning everyone hello this is today yes okay it's December one it's five to ten and 
from 10 o'clock the event starts although   it's already started people have started 
bringing their shop key yeah it's very cold   freezing weather this was one of my favorite 
events last year this is something that is   absolutely unique to Krakow all of these 
things we see under the Adams Monument is   our cribs a crib baby Jesus cribs but done 
in the most ornate way you can imagine and these designs are meant to it's a competition 
also so there's uh requirements about what   the shop key should have so they're meant to 
incorporate elements of Krakow in the design   ten o'clock it's starting so the the competition 
is done in different age groups there'll be kids   models but there'll be people who have like 
spent all year making these things and their   absolute works of art so it's a wonderful 
Christmas event unique to this city [Music] yeah so you can see some of the shop key are tiny and they'll be smaller than 
this one and then some of them pretty big getting on a meter meter and a half and people will be here who don't know 
what's happening and there's people who will come every year to see this 
thing special if you're in the   now and Krakow this is one of the 
most Christmassy things I think now it's 10 o'clock a few of the most ornate models are 
already here I think they bring them early   because they're very delicate if you're 
walking past a lot of people and stuff you   know you don't want to be breaking your 
models that you've worked all year on   but by The End by 12 o'clock there will be shopky 
all over the base of the monument there'll be   there'll be dozens dozens of them so over the next 
hour or two we'll see a steady stream of people oh hey hey I I've made the smart because 
this is normal for me that's the normal   one that's not a normal one amazing and this 
is uh something something in the egg I think   yeah it's not a uh is that a real eggshell this 
is a real eggshell I I just I just play with that   so delicate it's so easy to break yeah it is of 
course but I'm I'm I I'm watching for it foreign [Music] makers will arrive all right I remember 
I would like to it'll all be full with   but these are I love these ones they're 
so awesome for me normal size because like last year it is the biggest I ever 
made many how many days did you work on   this three months three months and half 
months I think you go what's your name thank you for showing them to us like this so 
there you go this is this is how the competition   goes the best ones I think it uh rated that they 
there's a museum on the other side of the square   here so in a week or two these will all go on 
display in the museum so you can come and see them   up close but this is better because you see them 
it's it's exciting because everybody's presenting   them today hold yourself we should see we should 
see a whole bunch of kids bringing theirs later on it's a very crackout themed event 
under the Marriott Under The Monuments   and if you look carefully are they incorporate elements to crack out 
look at the towers on the crib and the steeple and again so very creative how they take elements   elements of the city now I want you to 
be the Mariachi it can be uh see the Dome reminds me of this so elements 
of the city Incorporated sometimes they get pretty creative last year last year when we when you go to see 
the museums a lot of these have mechanical Parts   you're going to see all the characters rotating 
around lights it's really incredible works of art [Music] what happens if we could see people 
bringing their shop key they register them   I think we started they present them 
you don't you don't get this in the   museum if you go to the museum you'll 
just see them sitting in the case but it's just nice to see them all after 
all this hard work building these doing   the uh this is the moment they get to 
come and present to the world the work [Music] that's fantastic I recommend this is 
what I suggest to people if they come in here   yeah first Thursday of December 
you have to come and see this I remember from last year 
you get some way out ones [Music] also get something okay oh this one's got a movie did you all 
make this together who made this Village yo and you made it and some of these guys 
my mom made it excellent it's very beautiful is this your first year making it oh in some 
tradition it's a tradition some skills for his   son and his son is six sixth year wow oh 
look I didn't even notice that's because   You Must Have Spent A very long time 
making this but I think two months I can imagine yeah is the one with lights conquer shopping please that's a beautiful poster and they 
will give you one gorgeous is that yeah I asked one guy I had some incredible one it 
took him three months see how fun it is look wow where did you all come from suddenly I think   the bus arrived the bus arrived 
with all the Shopkins [Music] see I love it it's a little bit of mayhem   a lot of kids a lot of excitement free posters 
beautiful work not in that Eastern shops my heart would be in my mouth if I spent 
two months or three months making it and   then I had to carry it between all these 
people I would be so nervous to break it yes oh so difficult number one [Music] foreign [Music] I think the common thing is to have 
the towers of the Marathi reflected that's the cruises these kids are from the International School wearing the same hat look all the kids from the international school 
made made a few Shopkins how long did it take to   make them two weeks two weeks we had five hours 
per week wow and do you do it every year okay I   think third or fourth year I think that's great so 
all the ones on the front here we go there we go the workers good we don't mind people getting in the 
way because this is all about people as well   nah okay look at this one this 
one has iconic so we got videos   on iconic he's a mascot look 
at there we go proudest punch the tiny ones you definitely have to come to the 
museum to get a good look at the tiny tiny ones um foreign [Music] [Music] we had a little talk already oh excellent yeah 
we want to make a picture together it's a big one   there's a lot of kids worked on this one wow be careful look at that beautiful by 12 o'clock 
this will all be full of Shopkins [Music] [Music] [Music] [Music]   hello hi we talked last year which which can we 
see can we see the one from here that you made I   think it will be hard because this is very very 
small ah on the top on the top it's blue okay [Music] I remember you said last year your 
family had been making this yeah many we   are still doing it many uh how many years I 
don't know it's like a my grand grandfather like almost eight years almost eight 
years I think I think about hundreds   if you count all the generations 
holy yeah well did you now how   did you do in the competition last 
year it was a reward the reward wow well we wish you we wish you best 
in the competition again this year   what's your name Andrew see you 
next year yeah we will look we   will look when we go and see them 
we will look out for it thank you okay I I don't know what it is but I just 
find this one of the most special moments it's got a bit of everything it's 
got the visitors it's got the   they've been doing the traditions for decades it's got kids of all ages you 
just starting and making um it's organized it's disorganized [Music] it's got the most magnificent 
backdrop you could want [Music] as a reminder First first day of every 
December this is when these event is on starts at   10 o'clock then in a week or two they will be on 
display in the museum Kristoff kristofia something   like that which is also in the Square here so in 
a week or two you can go and actually see them   how many how many years have 
you been making the shop key 52. yes since you were a kid uh five years wow 
that's I made first first shotgun and did your   family make them as well before you so you're 
like your grandfather made a shopcast and and wow   length for him almost since the 
beginning of the the start of   the like the competition my first my first 
[Music] competition yes it was in 90 50 years 70s 90 70. so yeah and do you make the big 
ones or the medium ones or the small ones   this year I made a minator okay with x the X ah okay in X in eggs is it here where is it is it   oh I see it the favorite egg I see it ah and 
then in other years you've made big big ones uh next years yes I will pick yeah two 
meters okay next year and and and how   long do you do you spend making the big one 
from tomorrow oh yeah from tomorrow seriously   it takes like that well so your work you 
work on it earlier I start in next years yeah two days ago and the little Faberge one was 
it quicker to do or did it   also take a very as long as long to make [Music] it pink maybe one month and I do two weeks okay you must you must have very very good eyesight   yeah to work in things that's so 
tiny I I couldn't do it the glass and last year how did you do 
in the competition I I was young I was uh for many years yes competitors ah 
okay yeah yeah yeah and uh family his group is [Music] well thank you so much listen thank you 
yeah we wish you uh good luck this year   and we look forward to see it in the 
museum with the uh the magnifying glass this lady made this lady made this one 
no wonder she's looking so proud [Music] We got the dragon we got iconic three months then we have iconic the dragon's smoky we got some good elements of Krakow for this one 
they bring all the kids to come and say hello there right because this is something for the 
city where they bring all the kids because   it's the tradition of the city that's why 
I think if you're a visitor it's something   really really good to come and see right because 
it's just the real it's a once a year tradition   that the whole city Gets behind family and 
nativity scene so you can you can do all   the normal tourist stuff right but this is unique everybody's interested in this one again some new 
traditional new family I think we will see them   on next nativity scene competition on next you 
guys you guys made this you made it all of you   did it take you a long time like an hour an hour it took 
you an hour two hours maybe   how what two months you took all of you 
guys to make this wow it's very beautiful um who made iconic who made you made 
iconic you got the job foreign excellent good job [Music]   they start them young they decide about our powers [Music] that's what it's all about citizens foreign just off the Christmas Market and as you 
can see they're bringing the shop key   already now bringing them here to display this is one of the master Craftsmen look at 
this oh look at this one this is the winner oh this is gonna be um and as you can see everybody is in there bringing 
their Shopkin into uh Christopher but I talked   to this guy last year hello I talked to you 
last year he's also here you don't remember   last year you made one the same size no you did a 
bigger one why did you do a smaller one this year yeah it's quicker to do the smaller yeah 
smaller version how old are you are you   what 15. so what what what's the category that 
you're in I'm in Technical High School okay okay is there some Electronics in 
this yes I thought there might be   oh some magnets or something they're 
gonna no no no magnets and they are   spinning okay are spinning and 
this plate is spinning also and   chips also spinning the Sheep is spinning and 
also there are lights in every Tower When You're   15 years old yes that's crazy congratulations 
did you win a prize last year yes yeah yes   I won you won you were number one yes in 
your age group wow well good luck this year now this is the international school 
right hello International kids good job what the hell wow wow wow my exactly you made this your family in school this one number 13 I hope 
that's not going to be unlucky as it I said I said I hope it's not going 
to be unlucky and the tower broke wow my goodness you guys you've been working hard foreign wow look at that nothing excellent respectful 
super good luck wow another masterpiece   another Masterpiece can you believe it all 
right people can you beat this for Christmas oh no we need snow can you be okay 
Nina's kindly pointed out we needed snow ah look Christmas Market horses carriages Marriott's uh Christmas tree you cannot beat this 
stuff and it's all free the only thing it cost   us a cup of coffee a cup of coffee for one of the 
most Christmassy things you could ever want to do so to end off the video remember 
we interviewed Darius this morning   this is Darius and as I mentioned um the city 
or some of the shops and hotels buy some of   the shopky and then put them on display every 
year in the cases like this all around the city   so this is darius's uh nativity scene 
from last year and now it's on display   and if you remember this 
year he's made a small one and you know I think this one probably 
had some oh yeah you can see the uh Pope is uh is spinning and baby Jesus is spinning I remember last year yeah also some 
Electric the horse guy comes out   the guide is moving around the side 
another guy he's not a guide he's a knight but I remember this one also 
from the museum last year so okay any visitor to crack off for Christmas well this 
season shop Key Shop key is a big part of what   it's all about here and this is the other side the 
dragon comes out see what was what was beautiful   what was beautiful about this one was it was 
two-sided you know a lot of them we saw today   right we're just one-sided but this one this one 
was twice the work because he did both sides of it one of the best no wonder what I wanted one of the 
best that's why they put this one in the center   right next to well next to next to the Christmas 
Market so come and check it out and it's got   all the lights so especially I think at night 
time at night time this is gonna look awesome and uh here we are Miss shopky Miss shopkick 
2022 foreign she's getting in the spirit we   have our poster romac thank you again 
for introducing us to Darius my friends|||Ketchup - no What is this makaron? I do not need Ooh! Oh babushka! Welcome to Poland, kurwa mac Welcome everyone to professional slavic country review Through the eyes of Boris the shashlik king Okay let's get right into it Poland is very nice country With a great many things to offer Including some of the best mayonez ever created So why did I go to Poland in first place? Because [truck] it, why not I just felt like driving Sit down. Start up blyatmobile Drive 1000km and OPA is Poland So what are things to see in Poland? Well, the beer price tags are very nice to look at And of course let's not forget Top quality slav fashion sense Although taking pictures of Adidas shop You will get kicked out of shopping centre Until you get to next shopping centre And you try to explain "no blyat I am slav superstar why you do this" And then go for drink instead But no, before you even arrive in capital city of Poland You go through [trucking] hours of road works And big trucks There is a million of these trucks everywhere And my guess is, they are carrying good quality Polish mayonez To rest of world But no even before you arrive in Poland There is guard at border checkpoint coming to ask you About something And at this point I did realise You really need to speak Polish to go to Poland Because after asking him: English? He say: no! And after saying: po russkii? He clearly lost his interest to talk to me any longer And hinted me to kindly [duck] off So I did. And got a beer. It was good Once I finally arrived in capital city Warsaw I was instantly greeted with many places willing to sell me a lot of beer At very good price Most of these places being open 24h every day But this being slav country, I am not surprised Looking back at our Polish lesson What do we remember? Beer is piwo Yes correct You go to shop. You say: And not the usual: Or if you are in hurry, you can say: They will understand So when I went to Warsaw, I was expecting high-rise soviet style apartment buildings But what I got instead was these massive office buildings and hotels And high-rise buildings of course And blin was there so many trams here There was maybe 5-6 buses And a trillion trams blin More trams than cherries in babushka's kompot Blin there is even bar named Tramwaj And what is up with all the kebab places? Does everyone like kebab so much? Blin seriously I am considering coming to Poland, starting my own business The palace of the shashlik king We serve blins, shashlik and kompot You show up in Adidas tracksuit You get 10% discount So what else is there? You can buy clothes with price of kilogram City is very nice and green There is bench for sleep if you have had too much водка And some rare black chickens here Some more high-rise apartment buildings right in town center Right next to fancy hotel that cost you arm and leg to stay in And maybe half of liver But at least there is flower shop for you to buy Because remember, slav girls, they love their flowers And the fancy cars, oh my god look at this [ship] blyat I should have gotten this for blyatmobile Look at that quality! And another pretty common thing to see is this And I do not mean street market selling components for kompot But they actually sell whole sunflowers here Now that is next level of slav If you are walking on street and you happen to not be in shopping center You will see that every shop is as small as neighbor Vadim's apartment And there is a hundred shops on each big road Where you can buy everything to fulfill your slav needs Including but not limited to Even more alcohol Looking at traffic in midtown Warsaw You might consider it is very calm and normal But you actually have to drive like race driver to keep pace with everyone else My suggestion: you come try it out yourself The metro tunnels in town look something directly taken from the brain Of the author of Metro 2033 But sadly inside I did not find any trace of mutants or Artyom And since the air was breathable outside, I just went for drink instead If you want to travel to Poland, you will need to know they have their own currency The Polish Zloty After I exchanged some currency and went to Poland And checked out the prices I realised something I [trucking] love Poland And then went for drink There are many smaller cities in Poland you can check out Like this Lomza, for example Very nice people. Actually there is very nice people all around Poland Especially if you know how to speak Polish You say: Is all okay People are very happy to help you find good squat location And also take picture Also remember, if you want to fit in to local crowd Just put on your tracksuit Look at this guy. Adidas pants and Nike shoes I bet you five blins he watches my channel So go ahead and watch it as well Put on your tracksuit And let's turn this cheeki sad into a cheeki breeki! If you like walking streets of Warsaw You will see many nice things to take pictures of Like this beautiful wall of art for example Being accompanied by its official guardian - the squatting gopnik Okay so other times you will just see some crazy [ship] Most of the time, [ship] that you do not want explanation to Or maybe other times you might come across one of these cars That has seen some rough slav love Both outside and in Okay maybe I should not be complaining. Maybe this is someone's regular car If you plan to go on exploring some of the back streets of Warsaw Keep in mind that you are usually not alone And you could find some new friends of cheeki breeki hardbass And then go for drink You know, generally for most people there is no reason to go to Poland ever But already I can say 3 reasons One - good mayonez Two - the beer is cheap. And good And three - they have shop named Kakadu, blin It's like... It's like they knew I was coming I am honored, Poland. You make me happy At this time the security came to stop me filming again So I filmed the electric stairs instead Mmm... This is some slav magic Some more reasons I like Poland so much Especially since I was driving There is a million signs on highway saying: Konec As if to say: the end is near. Don't worry. You'll be hitting a deer And also driving along highway I see these signs Danger - piesi So I try remember Aha! Dog - pies So all the time I am driving. I am thinking Do they have problem with wild dogs here or what? But after driving home very carefully looking for dogs It turns out, piesi does not mean dogs after all It mean pedestrians So that's why I almost ran people over Blin! And my last favorite sign No not that I mean sign of cows on road Giving milk to fuel the Polish economy Well of course that doesn't say that on sign, but It is strongly implied If you do plan to go exploring in city center of Warsaw I strongly suggest you do it at day It's not that people are going mug you or steal your money It's just that in daytime you are more likely to hear someone scream "kurwa mac" And that will make the trip worth it If it is someone missing their tram Or maybe someone falling off their rental bike There is always reason to say "kurwa" Like for example: Which means it's [trucking] raining In city center there is large clock tower It show the time Oh look it's beer o' clock Some very helpful people here to teach you some mathematics Like blin + blin = blyat If you are into some modern Polish art then I suggest you check out "The shopping cart of fortune" Some say the bum who rolled this here, is now Polish Olympic athlete Others say this cart has been here from beginning of time I say it is beautiful blyat. It is blyatiful But if you really want to see something truly beautiful Just open your eyes, man And get out of way. Because locals drive twice as fast as speed limit So there is a thousand places in Poland you can visit If I could, I would squat on every street corner of every town of every city And visit every Adidas shop Just to say: Never fear, Boris is here But remember if you do happen to go outside in the night Try out the local pubs and food places. You will like it Warsaw at night is beautiful And never fear to go on the Polonez taxi It will take you in new slav directions you have never seen before But probably to shop to get some more piwo and vodka And after you drive the long way back to your home Remember the polish kielbasa you bought Dip it inside the sweet heavenly slav elixir That is Polish mayonez Don't forget to lock your door Unless you want other people to get wrong idea I mean Polish sausage not for sharing blyat You think I drive to Poland for fun? No no no Friends suggest me I try this mayonez Winiary And now when I run out - I need to go back to Poland, blyat That is the way of the slav and the Boris You want it - you go get it And that is exactly how I will be doing next slav country review If you like this video, write in comments What country I should visit next But until then, my friends I will be enjoying my kielbasa and mayonez from Poland Stay cheeki breeki, my friends! I will see you next time|||(upbeat music) - Welcome to my Poland travel video where I'll be your Polish travel guide. Want to visit Poland or know
what things to do in Poland? This video covers two
weeks worth of adventures in Poland during the month of September. Join us on our two week adventure as we go all around the country. The first stop on our
Poland tour was Krakow, a city in southern Poland. On day one, we visited the market square. Made an effort to try
different types of foods, we went shopping, and most importantly we tried to adjust to the six hour time difference. As for accommodations, this was the first time
we only booked Airbnbs. So the funny thing about our Airbnb that we did not realize
is common in Europe are the way the doors
and the windows open. So what we did is we opened the handle to the top and we were
tryin' to open the door and the top half literally came off. We thought it came off the hinges. We contacted our Airbnb host and we were just like oh my God, so we broke your door. She was panicking a bit too but soon after we realized that when you put it back down, put the handle the regular way and just pull, ta-da! Now that we've been able to
have a good night's rest, let's see what day two in
Krakow has in store for us. So we just got to check
out the Wawel Cathedral as well as the Bell Tower where you can have an excellent viewpoint and a museum. What we did is an audio tour guide which you get one of these head sets. I know, super glamorous
and you follow along here. This was a little confusing at times but overall definitely
worth the experience. I loved the little detailing. I just wanna quickly mention
that having a rental car to do this tour of Poland
was extremely helpful. In Krakow, we discovered
that there are many areas on the street where you
can park your car for free on the weekends, bonus. So, we haven't had time
to rent one of these 'cause we've been using our feet to walk but if you do, just download an app. They're all over the city and when you're done, you
just leave it where it is. Don't be afraid to get lost in Poland. You never know where you're gonna end up. (upbeat music) Many people recommended to
check out the salt mines when in Poland so we decided
to do the miner's route instead of the tourist route so that means there are two. This one was more authentic as you can tell by the wardrobe. We've got like emergency
equipment on us, you get a map, it's around two hours. I was a little chilly. I'm wearing like a long sleeve underneath so I was a little cold and
it's a pretty neat experience. Wieliczka Salt Mine is one of Poland's oldest business ventures. It is a monument to the history of Poland and the Polish nation with
over 1,000,000 tourists visiting each year. Online ticket prices for the salt mine were approximately 89 złoty per person. There are many mounds in Poland. We decided to go to a paying one to guarantee a beautiful view. If you have about an hour in your day and you're in Krakow, check it out. Maybe they're all around the country but I know for sure that they're here. You also get access to a little museum which we're about to go to next. (upbeat music) Okay, we've spent a
good few days in Krakow. Now, let's head to Zakopane. Between Canada and over here in Poland, I always seem to push
when I'm supposed to pull with the doors and vice versa so as you can tell you gotta pull. Zakopane is a town in the
extreme south of Poland. We primarily came here to hike and to see the Tatra Mountains. But of course we tried to
squeeze in anything extra. We are in the center of Zakopane. There are a lot of options for things to eat from
stands to restaurants. You name it, come hungry
here 'cause the food is prett yoogd from
what we've tried so far. Also, I noticed that a lot of
stores, like clothing stores, are not open on Sundays
so save your shopping for days during the week. And also, fun fact, a
lot of people come here from the Ukraine because
you don't need a visa. Day two in Zakopane brought us to one of our trip highlights, Morskie Oko. If you are looking for a
variety of hike options, this is the place to visit. Today we are at Morskie Oko. It cost us about 30 złoty
which is around $10 Canadian to park our car because we drove and then five złoty each per person to get into the park. So Morskie Oko is within the Tatra Mountains. It's absolutely beautiful here. It took us about two hours and 15 minutes from the very bottom to get up here. You do have the option to
take a horse-drawn carriage. That is about 50 złoty per person. It's up to you. We walked it, it was fine. It's not too much of a heavy terrain but you do have to have a bit of endurance so make sure you get a good night's sleep. We are here around September so the temperatures are
constantly changing and elevating so bring lots of layers, you'll be fine. Hiking shoes are always a good idea. So we decided to hike up from Morskie Oko about 45 minutes to (speaking in Polish). It's quite an uphill hike so if you don't have hiking shoes, make sure you bring some poles. The view here is pretty good but what I love most about anything is seeing Morskie Oko from like this bird's eye view. So to me, it's a 10 outta 10. As it is now time to leave Zakopane, I wanted to quickly step
into an upside down house. What am I talking about? Here, I'll show you. So over here we're at a very
quick tourist attraction which is 13 złoty which
is around $5 Canadian. You can see an upside down house. When you go in there, you're only allowed to be there for five minutes
because you get dizzy. So if you have about
half an hour in your day and you're in Zakopane, check it. (upbeat music) Wroclaw is a place we
absolutely fell in love with and it is the largest
city in Western Poland. We are in the beautiful city of Wroclaw. Over here there is a large university so you will see a ton of students. It's a very picturesque city. If you're lucky, you'll
see a lot of gnomes. The city is known for that. We're gonna head and visit some viewpoints to get some incredible views because we're only here for
one day, passing through. So let's go see what we see. Not only is Wroclaw known for a number of historical sites, but I heard that some bars
and pubs stay open in Wroclaw until the last person leaves. We didn't stay out to test it that late so if you you'll have to let me know in the comment box below
if it's actually true. After climbing way too many
steps, we made it to the top of the lookout tower
of the Garrison Church. You just peek through. To get some incredible views. Let's quickly head out now
and peek into the panorama of the Battle of Raclawice. The picture is 114 meters
long and 15 meters high. I swear we're leaving Wroclaw soon but if you see the
panorama, grab one of these to select your language which is English and you'll be able to get the full history of this beautiful panoramic painting. And yes, I just had to run off as the employee was rushing us
out for the next group tour. Poznan was on our list of places to visit because my dad studied and
lived there in the '80s so naturally I was curious to see. We made it to Poznan which is a cute little
town as you can see. We saw the billy goats
hit their heads at noon which happens every single day here at the (speaking in Polish)
which is the old town square. And now we're gonna try
a St. Martin's croissant which is protected by the
European Union certificate of authenticity which means it
can only be reproduced here. I think it's raining so let's give this a shot. Interested in seeing more
about food in Poland? Well, stay tuned for my next video that features all of
the dishes that we ate, what food we tried, just
for you to get an idea of what to order when you're in Poland. We made it Kolobrzeg! - Kolobrzeg.
- Kolobrzeg. - Kolobrzeg is a Polish city
located on the Baltic Sea in the northwestern part of Poland. So we're in Kolobrzeg
and I wanted to mention that especially in this area there are a lot of sanatoriums. So really what that means
is if you have an illness that you've been wanting
to cure for a while and you have a doctor's
note, you can come here. They kinda have like spas. And a doctor will give you like a certain schedule to follow. You can also purchase more. I find that really interesting
'cause we don't seem to have that in Canada that I'm aware of. This is also a really beautiful place in the summer so that was my fun fact for the day 'cause that is something I didn't know before I came to Poland. Kolobrzeg has a 12 kilometer long beach and is a popular holiday spot. Manowo is a village in Poland, specifically near the city of Kozalin. Usually during our
vacation, we take hotels but this time we took an Airbnb, every single day we're
in a different location. But of course I have family here in Poland so we are lucky to stay in Manowo. Since I haven't been back
to Poland in 15 years, it was nice to see and compare how some of my family lives in Poland. When my mom was younger,
and still living in Poland, her family would often go to
pick blueberries and mushrooms. They even ended up selling them. I've noticed that people still do this on the streets of Poland. This was my first time as well
as my boyfriend's first time picking mushrooms and boy was it an experience I'll never forget. So make some friends with some locals and maybe they'll take
you out to some good spots to pick some mushrooms of your own. Are you enjoying this video? Well, guess what, I have
tons of other travel videos so don't forget to hit the
like button, subscribe, leave me a comment, join me on
Instagram, Facebook, Twitter. You name it, I'm there. On our way to Gdansk, we stopped at a little town called Sopot, just to see this cute little coffee shop. Isn't it neat? Sopot is a town on the Baltic
Sea in Northern Poland. Right now we are in Sopot. Right behind me is the
longest wooden pier in Poland. Sopot is in the middle of two other cities because this little area
is called Trojmiasto which is like a tricity so right beside Gdansk and Gdynia. It's so busy here. We're here on a Sunday. So many people you guys
can't even imagine. And what we have noticed that's trending are leather jackets so
if you've got a leather, faux leather, anything of that sort, pants, shorts, skirts, bring them. Gdansk is located on the Baltic Sea. We spent two days here but even if you can only
spend one day in Gdansk, you'll get a good glimpse of what Gdansk is all about. So right behind me here
you see a bar mleczny, which literally means milk bar. They're a traditional style
breakfast, lunch, dinner places that are on the cheaper side. Very cafeteria style. So budget friendly. We just tried it out for the first time. We loved it. If you don't see a menu
with English subtitles kind of underneath, then
I would suggest googling what you really love so you
know what words to look out for. Most places in Poland do
have English translations and sometimes Spanish translations. This one didn't. But they have a lot of food on display so you cannot go wrong if you find these little bar mlecznys. Can you say Gdansk? I know, it's hard. I can only say it because I speak Polish. Let's try it together. Gdansk, Gdansk, good job. We are in beautiful Gdansk. It is electric, vibrant,
colorful, musical. There's so many creative people here. Doing their thing. If you guys are paying
with cash wherever you go within Poland what we've noticed is that they want exact
change most of the time so if you're bringing like 100 złoty, like, big bills they
tend to struggle with it. I'm not sure why they don't
have lots of change on hand but always have lots of coins and you should be fine. (upbeat music) Now let's head to the largest city and the capital of Poland, Warsawa. Or as most English speakers
like to say, Warsaw. We made it to Warsaw. Right now we're in the Palace
of Culture and Science. It cost us about 20 złoty per person to get up to the top. Yes you take an elevator and
you get an amazing viewpoint. You definitely feel the rush of the city here so lemme show you the viewpoint and then let's explore Warsaw
for the next three days. Are you a city person or
more of a nature person? Lemme know in the comment box below. If you answered city and you love to shop, just like me, I'm gonna show
you which mall was my favorite. In the center of Warsaw you have, right next to the railway station, a shopping center called Złote Tarasy. We're going on Segways today. My first Segway experience. Oh I'm super nervous. I'm going in circles. My boyfriend seemed to pick
up the Segway skills faster but it was hard with all
the cobblestone streets. It made the ride so bumpy. Plus I didn't wanna hit anyone. We are in beautiful Warsawa. Every country we visit, we try to get on their public transportation system and just compare it to what
we have at home in Toronto. Even though we had a car,
we wanted to check out the transit system here in Poland so right now we're taking the subway. We did take the bus before. And prices range from
two złoty to four złoty. It obviously depends where you go. It goes on zones. But everything's been
smooth sailing so good luck. All right, now let's get outside in nature and visit a park that was
recommended over and over again. We made it to Lazienki Park
which is the largest park in Warsaw or Warsawa, however
you like to pronounce it. You can come here for a run, a jog, a stroll with your children. It's beautiful, there's a restaurant, there's a palace as you can see behind me so there's no shortages of
things to do here in Warsawa. On our very last day it
was raining on and off. We weren't sure what to do so we decided to take a peek at Warsawa's multipurpose sports
and entertainment stadium. We just did the PGE
Narodowy Stadium VIP tour. This stadium is a multipurpose stadium so there's concerts, sporting events, what we got in this
little excursion of ours is we got to see the locker rooms. There are even prison
cells here, lodge rooms, different viewpoints,
it's something to be seen. Tickets are around 27 złoty. So I'll convert that down below. And the tour is approximately
an hour to an hour and a half so you can go at your leisure. So if you're into sports, I would suggest coming here. Don't forget to like, subscribe, and share this video with your friends. Let's go to the next country.|||[Music] is a small town in Western Poland only 130 kilometers east of Berlin and 110 kilometers west of Bosnia civil scenes Town Center consists of only a few streets but they were richly decorated with inviting flowers when we visited on a chilly Early Autumn day it's clear that the citizens are proud of a town center despite arriving on a Sunday we were still able to find open restaurants and a grocery store in the center [Music] foreign 's bench is an attraction in the Market Square and depicts a famous artist who grew up in the town and used to work as a piano tuner [Music] you can still find remnants from when it was a world medieval settlement and its Church's date back centuries ago [Music] thank you [Music] [Music] foreign [Music] attraction of the town is its massive statue that you will see with later there were streams of people visiting the Christ the King statue overlooking the town believe it or not the statue is larger than the Christ the Redeemer statue in Rio de Janeiro no wonder Local's nickname of the town is apparently Rio de swivel tunero you can park enter and walk all the way up to the foot of the statue for free the search is quite a sight being 33 meters high with its header alone four and a half meters tall and 15 Tons heavy 21 000 people mainly residents of the Town donated money towards the building of the statue intending to become a place of pilgrimage on the way up the hill you will find Biblical Art mainly depicting Jesus's crucifixion and Resurrection The Boulders of the statue and the effort that went into it is refreshing [Music] foreign [Music] thank you [Music] foreign [Music]|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||ARE GIVING THEM A VIRUS. >>> PRESIDENT BIDEN IS SPEAKING IN BALI, INDONESIA NOW. LET'S LISTEN LIVE. >> THE LATEST EVENTS IN EUROPE, I BRIEFED THEM ON MY DISCUSSION WITH THE PRESIDENT OF POLAND, AS WELL AS NATO SECRETARY- GENERAL SONGBIRD. WE AGREED TO SUPPORT POLLAN'S INVESTIGATION INTO THE EXPLOSION IN RURAL POLAND, NEAR THE UKRAINIAN BORDER. I WANT TO MAKE SURE WE FIGURE OUT EXACTLY WHAT HAPPENED. APPARENTLY TWO PEOPLE WERE KILLED. THEN, WE WILL COLLECTIVELY DETERMINE OUR NEXT STEP THAT WE INVESTIGATE AND PROCEED. THERE WAS TOTAL ANONYMITY AMONG FOLKS AT THE TABLE. RUSSIAN MISSILES, AS THEY'VE DEMONSTRATED THROUGHOUT THIS WAR AGAINST UKRAINE, THEY HAVE BEEN TOTALLY UNCONSCIONABLE, WHAT THEY ARE DOING, TOTALLY UNCONSCIONABLE. THE MOMENT WHEN THE WORLD HAS COME TOGETHER, THE G 20, TO URGE THE ESCALATION CALL RUSSIA CONTINUES TO TOTALLY ISOLATE UKRAINE, WHILE WE ARE MEETING. THERE WERE SCORES AND SCORES OF MISSILE ATTACKS IN WESTERN
UKRAINE. YOU SUPPORT UKRAINE UKRAINE. YOU SUPPORT UKRAINE FULLY IN THIS MOMENT, WE WILL DO WHATEVER IT TAKES TO GET THEM TO CUT BACK AND DEFEND
THEMSELVES THERE IS PRELIMINARY INFORMATION THERE IS PRELIMINARY INFORMATION . I DON'T WANT TO SAY THAT WE COMPLETELY INVESTIGATED. IT IS UNLIKELY IN THE MINDS OF THE TRAJECTORY THAT IT WAS FIRED
FROM RUSSIA, BUT WE WILL SEE. FROM RUSSIA, BUT WE WILL SEE.
WE WILL SEE. >> THAT WAS PRESIDENT BIDEN >> THAT WAS PRESIDENT BIDEN SPEAKING FROM BALI, INDONESIA, WHERE THE G 20 SUMMIT IS TAKING PLACE. HE SAID HE SPOKE TO THE SECRETARY GENERAL OF NATO AND ANDRE DUE TO, THE PRESIDENT OF POLAND, WHERE THIS OPTIC, THIS ROCKET LANDED, AND SAID, THE U.S. HAS AGREED TO SUPPORT THE INVESTIGATION, SO THEY WILL FIND OUT EXACTLY WHAT HAPPENED AND FIGURE OUT NEXT STEP. ALSO, THE LATEST RUSSIAN MISSILE ATTACKS IN UKRAINE. THEY HAVE TARGETED KEY
INFRASTRUCTURE IN UKRAINE, INFRASTRUCTURE IN UKRAINE, ESPECIALLY AROUND THE CAPITOL HEAVE AND LIBBY, IN WESTERN UKRAINE AROUND THE POLISH BORDER. YOU MAY REMEMBER IN OUR EARLIER COVERAGE, WE TALKED ABOUT PEOPLE FLEEING THROUGH THE CITY OF TEL AVIV TO CROSS THE BORDER IN POLAND. HE REFERRED TO THE LATEST RUSSIAN MISSILE ATTACKS HAS TOTALLY UNCONSCIONABLE AND SAID, WE SUPPORT UKRAINE FULLY IN THIS MOMENT. SHOUTED QUESTIONS FROM THE GAGGLE OF PRESS ASKED IF THEY BELIEVED IT WAS FIRED FROM RUSSIA. HE SAID, IF THE PRELIMINARY INFORMATION CONTESTS THAT, SAID IT IS UNLIKELY BASED ON THE TRAJECTORY, BUT WE WILL SEE. THAT KIND OF CONTRADICTS SOMETHING THAT WE HEARD FROM PRESIDENT JUDAH EARLIER WHERE HE SAID, UKRAINE'S PRESIDENT BOWL AMANDA LINSKY GAVE ADJUDICATION THAT IT WAS ROCKET LAUNCH FROM THE TERRITORY OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION. SHOULD ALSO NOTE THAT NATO HAS A FEW PROCESSES IN PLACE BEFORE ANYTHING MILITARY MIGHT HAPPEN. FIRST, IT IS ARTICLE FOUR, WHERE THEY CAN CALL FOR A MEETING ABOUT MATTERS OF CONCERN. KELLY O'DONNELL, JOINING US NOW FROM BALI INDONESIA, THERE ARE MORE CONVERSATIONS TO BE HAVE I BELIEVE BEFORE ANYTHING OF A MILITARY NATURE, OR MAYBE ANYTHING OF A DIPLOMATIC NATURE, WILL TAKE PLACE. THIS IS A BEGINNING OF A MUCH LONGER SET OF CONVERSATIONS. >> EARLY STAGES, FOR SURE. IT IS STRIKING TO HEAR FROM THE PRESIDENT AN ASSESSMENT THAT SEEMS TO CUT AGAINST WHAT THE CONVENTIONAL EXPECTATION WOULD
BE. WE LOOKED AT WHAT IS THE STATE WE LOOKED AT WHAT IS THE STATE OF UNDERSTANDING ABOUT DID RUSSIA FIRE THE MUNITION THAT IS SAID TO HAVE CAUSED THE DEATH OF TWO POLISH RESIDENTS. HE SAID IT IS UNLIKELY BUT THERE IS INFORMATION TO CONTEST THAT BASED ON THE TRAJECTORY. BUT, HE IS NOT TELLING US HOW HE KNOWS THAT., BUT IT DOES RAISE MORE QUESTIONS. IF IT IS NOT THE RESPONSIBILITY OF RUSSIA, THEN, CERTAINLY, IT WOULD TAKE THE ISSUE OF THE NATO CASE AND PUT IT INTO A DIFFERENT CATEGORY. COULD IT BE SOME KIND OF OTHER ACCIDENT?
WE WILL HAVE TO FIND OUT. WE WILL HAVE TO FIND OUT. THAT IS WHY WE OFTEN HEAR THE INVESTIGATION NEEDS TO TAKE PLACE. THE PRESIDENT ALSO TALKED ABOUT IT WILL FORCE US TO LOOK AT THE TOTALITY OF WHAT HAS BEEN HAPPENING FROM RUSSIA WITH THE ONSLAUGHT OF RUSSIAN ATTACKS ON CITIES IN UKRAINE AS A PART OF THE OVERALL CONVERSATION HERE.|||PRESIDENT. LET'S HEAR WHAT SHE SAYS. >> THANK YOU VERY MUCH. MY HUSBAND AND I HAVE ENJOYED  VISITING YOUR BEAUTIFUL COUNTRY. I WANT TO THANK PRESIDENT AND  MRS. DUDA, FOR THEIR WARM  WELCOME AND THEIR GENEROUS  HOSPITALITY. I HAD OPPORTUNITY TO VISIT THE  SCIENCE CENTER TODAY AND FOUND  IT NOT ONLY INFORMATIVE BUT  THOUGHTFUL IN ITS MISSION, WHICH HAS INSPIRED PEOPLE TO OBSERVE,  EXPERIMENT, ASK QUESTIONS, AND  SEEK ANSWERS. I CAN THINK OF NO BETTER PURPOSE FOR SUCH A WONDERFUL SCIENCE  CENTER. THANKS TO ALL INVOLVED IN GIVING US THE TOUR, ESPECIALLY THE  CHILDREN WHO MADE IT A WONDERFUL EXPERIENCE. AS MANY OF YOU KNOW, A MAIN  FOCUS OF MY HUSBAND PRESIDENCY,  IS SAFETY AND SECURITY OF THE  AMERICAN PEOPLE. I THINK ALL OF US AGREE, PEOPLE  SHOULD BE ABLE TO LIVE THEIR  LIVES WITHOUT FEAR, NO MATTER  WHAT COUNTRY THEY LIVE IN. THAT'S MY WISH FOR ALL OF US  AROUND THE WORLD. THANK YOU, AGAIN, FOR THIS  WONDERFUL WELCOME, TO YOUR VERY  SPECIAL COUNTRY. YOUR KINDNESS AND GRACIOUS  HOSPITALITY WILL NOT BE  FORGOTTEN. AND NOW, IT IS MY HONOR TO  INTRODUCE TO YOU, MY HUSBAND,  THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED  STATES, DONALD J. TRUMP.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Have you ever heard that we drink a lot of tea in Poland? That an average Pole drinks at least a glass of tea a day? This may seem surprising, shocking to some of you. After all, Poland is not one of the countries where tea is considered a national drink. Nor is it one of the countries with a specific tea drinking culture. That is, we drink tea as we want, we don't have a specific method of brewing tea or a specific time when we drink tea. And we'll talk about how we drink it today. If you are here for the first time, my name is Ania, I am a teacher of Polish as a foreign language, and this is Płynnie po polsku, a channel and podcast for learners of Polish as a foreign language. Remember that you can find the podcast on various platforms such as Google Podcasts or Spotify, or you can listen to it on YouTube on my channel Płynnie po polsku. You will also find a transcript on my website, and on YouTube you will find subtitles in Polish and English. There is also some news on my channel. If you sign up for my Patreon, you will also be able to get the vocabulary list for this podcast in pdf and exercises for this podcast. I strongly encourage and highly recommend it. There are three subscription thresholds, they are named after Polish cars: the first is Maluch, the second is Syrena, the third is Polonez. There are very, very different possibilities to learn Polish by yourself thanks to this. You can find a link to this Patreon on my YouTube channel. Ok, we're starting the podcast about tea. I don't think I would be a real linguist if I hadn't started this podcast with the word "tea". Because if you don't know me yet, I'm a linguist by profession. And I was wondering where the word "tea" in Polish came from. As you can see, it is neither very similar to words from western countries, nor to words from eastern countries. I mean, it's not the same as those other tea words from other languages. The etymology shows that "herba", that is the first part of the word, the first part of the word is Latin for "herb", and the second part, or "ta" (herba-ta), is simply the Polish name of the Chinese name for tea, Chinese word for tea, for plant. And it is more similar to those words in languages ​​we know, such as for example the English "tea". This is our "ta". Tea. So if we wanted to translate it literally, in Polish we have something like "tea herb". Such a word. It is not so strange when you look at the history of tea in Poland, because tea was initially treated by Poles more as a medicine, not a drink that you can enjoy. Tea was brought to Poland in the 17th century by a French woman, it was the wife of the Polish king. We know this because the king in a letter to his wife, that is to the queen, to this French woman, wrote, asked how to make tea, how to brew tea, that is how to prepare it, because he did not know himself. And it was the first time that tea was mentioned in Polish culture, in Polish history. Of course, tea was not yet popular in those years. As I said, many people treated it as medicine. Interestingly, many people treated it like poison. At the same time in Poland, people started drinking coffee, and coffee very quickly became much more popular than tea. In fact, it was only in the 19th century that large amounts of tea from Russia were brought to Poland, and then it began to be drunk on a massive scale. Because of course, if there were large amounts of tea, it also meant that it was much cheaper. It was no longer a good that could only be associated with salons, it became something for everyone. However, the way we drink it and our tea drinking habits come from the times of the Polish People's Republic, i.e. the times when Poland was under the communist government. This method, the way we drink tea, was then brought from Russia, it came from Russia. So how do we drink tea? I'm talking about history, about everything, but still haven't said about how we drink this tea. It is probably best to illustrate it with such a scene. Imagine that you are going to a Pole, to a Polish home. You are visiting a Polish person. Certainly, if this is an older person, they will ask you right away if you want to drink tea. It doesn't matter what time it is: it may be morning, it may be noon, it may be afternoon, it may be evening. Whether you are before or after lunch, before dinner, or after dinner, this person will suggest you to drink some tea. Some people in Poland actually drink tea just like in other countries they drink water. That is, with every meal, at any time. It is not strange to drink tea with lunch or dinner, for example. If you agree to drink tea in the Polish house where you are at the moment, you will surely get sugar in it. That is, the person you are with will offer you some sugar for tea. They won't offer you milk. In Poland it is still quite strange, weirdly perceived to drink milk with tea. Of course, I am talking especially about the older generations that are not used to it. Young people rather know that in other countries, whether Eastern or Western, tea is drunk differently. But I think the older generation might be shocked that, not everyone of course, but some, that we can ask for milk for tea. But you will definitely get sugar. And apparently this sweetening custom also comes from Russia. Apparently Chinese restaurateurs in Poland do not tolerate it. I read somewhere on the Internet that Chinese restaurateurs do not want to import better-quality tea from China, because they know that guests, people who come to restaurants will spoil the taste of tea with sugar. That is, they will sweeten the tea and thus the tea will not taste as it should, it will lose its flavor. So I do not know if we can talk about any particular culture of tea drinking in Poland, rather about the lack of this culture, or about the fact that we are ignoring the culture of drinking tea a bit. But tea still has an important place in our lives. Apparently, as many as 98% of Poles admit that they drink tea regularly. We mostly drink it at home. Poles rather do not drink tea at work or in a cafe. Maybe now also more often, because this tea is different. But research shows that Poles drink tea mainly in the morning, in the afternoon or in the evening, i.e. at times when they have finished their work, have returned home or have not left the house yet, if it is in the morning. However, there is not much research on this subject either, because as I said, there is no tea-drinking culture in Poland. I mean, we don't have a culture like the English do, for example. We also usually associate tea with something homemade, with something that we do at home and therefore we rarely order it, for example, in a cafe. For a long time myself, I had such a habit that I never ordered tea in a cafe, because tea was something for me that I can easily make at home. Maybe it is a bit different with coffee, but... Of course, with tea too, but we are perhaps not aware of it. I think that tea has potential in Poland, that is, it could become something more important than it is now. I read on one of the tea blogs, i.e. blogs, where a person interested in this topic described how we drink tea in Poland and that this Chinese tea drinking culture would be... would fit Poland. It would fit the habits of Poles. Tea in Chinese culture is said to be something that fosters relationships, that is, it strengthens, that is, makes them more durable, makes them more important. And you? Do you like drinking tea and if so, how do you drink it and when? Is there any specific tea drinking culture in your country? Is it drunk in a certain way, at a specific time? Or maybe you prefer to drink coffee in your country? And what do you prefer to drink: do you prefer to drink coffee or do you prefer to drink tea? Be sure to let me know in the comments what you like to drink and what the situation looks like in your country. I would love to find it out. In Poland, it is possible that this will change. We'll see. For now, it is as it is and this is what I wanted to describe to you. Because I was visiting my grandparents recently and noticed how often tea was offered and thought it was a great idea to present this tea drinking culture. I hope you found it equally interesting. And now, when you are in Poland, in some Polish home and you are offered tea, you will not think that it is anything strange or surprising. Thank you so much for making it until here, I remind you once again that you can find the transcript on my website, you can also find this podcast on YouTube with subtitles in Polish and English, as well as on various platforms such as Spotify or Google Podcasts. Also remember about my subscriptions, because I think it's a fun exercise, one that we can do after listening to a podcast or watching a video, so I recommend it to you very much. If you have any questions, please feel free to contact me. You can also find my e-mail on my website, you can also contact me on Instagram or Facebook. Thank you very much again and you will hear me again in the next episode of this podcast. Bye Bye!|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||where we're going Karolina? Kazimierz
Dolny. Where? Kazimierz Dolny Hola amigos ,welcome to a new video I'm
Chido-Fajny and today I'm in a really special place in Poland this city this
small city is called Kazimierz Dolny so I will take you to explore it so
follow me guys Kazimierz Dolny is located in the south
part of Poland close to one of the most famous cities in Poland which is called
Lublin.  The population of these like small town is only 2600 people so yeah
it's pretty small but totally worth it if you visit it one or two days tops
I think it will be ideal for you so guys now we're going to the
top of the city to a viewing point where you can appreciate the whole city but
you need to climb a lot of stairs so just be ready guys in case you visit now, check this amazing view Say Hi Tamal beautiful beautiful view of Kazimierz Dolny now guys I'm in the ruins of the castle
of Kazimierz Dolny it's a pretty pretty hot today and sorry I'm sweating look
Karolina and Tamal they are dead now it's pretty hot so I will show you the
castle this is a view and I think the city loves stairs, here we go again are going to the tower of the castle and we arrived to the tower if you decide to come to this
castle just bear in mind that you will need to climb a lot of stairs, it's pretty exhausting, that's why I'm talking like this we are in Wąwóz Korzeniowy
it's a difficult name well it's basically like like a road like in the
middle of the forest which is pretty nice but there are a lot of mosquitoes a
lot a lot a lot so we're kind of dying here check this out guys look beautiful
nature this city is really pet friendly  so if you have a dog, I recommend you to take him so, guys, this was Kazimierz Dolny
it's a really small but really nice city it's just two and a half hours from
Warsaw so I strongly recommend you to visit and well guys I hope you enjoy the
video if you liked it subscribe to my channel. I'm Chido-Fajnyand well see you
see you soon guys.|||after riding over 1 000 kilometers we decided to 
enjoy the coast for a bit since that was how i   lured Mariska this way initially hey wanna go to 
the beach in Poland we're settled in here and now   we're gonna check out the beach and today there's 
actually very little wind yesterday was insane we're back at the same place uh but uh more 
casual welcome to the northern Polish coast   the wind is picking up here and when in Poland you 
have to do like a Polish they just got here and   in no time they built their defenses Mariska 
brought this scarf along we got some sticks when in Rome come join me on the other side we're good now inspired inspired by the locals 
i was impressed by the Polish Baltic coast wide   beaches white sand and the Baltic sea is barely 
salty with clear blue water outside of Ustornie   Morskie there is still that wild untouched coast 
to be discovered where the sea still meets the   forest well you honor the hut with an extra stick 
there you go it all worked out with the universe and there's some historic surprises there 
too like abandoned naval cannon bunkers   built in the mid-1950s this is uh the temple 
the last polish temple of Ustronie Morskie bunker you want to come camp out here sleep tonight you can get tetanus and black mold and 
calcified at the same time look at that oh hello there's a normal way of going there oh yeah keep keep your two meters distance from me you're in the Polish naval bunkers are you finding your way 
back you have to stay close apparently there's a few of these out here on top 
of the concrete structure there is still the shaft   where the naval cannon was mounted by now long 
gone a cold war relic from Warsaw pact era Poland   when a country was still heavily under the 
influence of the soviet union there's another path   here this looks like it was the command center of 
where we were before was one of the battery guns ah indoor tree and of course as agreed upon with myself i 
did my training i also ended up introducing   Mariska to the heavy art of gains you made 
it to the gym that's the first step right your first weighted squat all 
right let's get you in position all right follow your butt down core activated congratulations first weighted squat yes   here we got some good post 
workout big fresh beautiful steak   but first i'm going to get a shake in i'm going to 
distract you there for a second from the glorious   effort you're uh undertaking there give you your 
prize you've earned you've earned this shake shake   shake you felt the cold hard steal of the squat 
and what not in your neck so drink up already it just tastes like soy milk 
what we have to throw it away   there's soy in here but before it was time 
to go again we couldn't leave before trying   Poland's most well-known food the pierog half 
moon dumplings with all kinds of fillings   of your choice hey there's fish again 
you think that's about 100 grams again oh it does there it is yeah exactly 
next with uh spinach spinach yeah yeah she speaks English i was doing like which 
meat is it a cow is it chicken is it pork yes all right now here comes the good stuff there we go she's actually the one who recognized   dumplings she's been doing her Polish research 
lately and she knew oh those up there are the   dumplings because i was only recognizing the 
hamburgers well let's dig in and we're good let's try the spinach this is the taste of Poland right here oh no oh you cheeky bugger a chicken i had it 
like in my hand here and the chicken just came in   and picked it out of my hand you son of a dog 
come here chicken they know their game see   this is what happens in areas that can get a bit 
touristy the locals just become uh very pushy man   yeah no don't you bark me you get 
nothing i know you you scheming chicken you're liking the motorbike okay an interesting week so far with the longest 
companionship on the road that i've ever enjoyed   normally this is me alone out there in the 
world exploring searching finding the way   i know a thing or two three four or even five 
about solitude and after a few years out there   alone there have been times where i would have 
liked to share certain moments but when you travel   alone on a motorbike you need to find out first 
if the travel companion glove fits so far so good   and we ride further up the beautiful 
Polish coast see you in the next one ciao|||  THIS COUNTRY, NEIL. NEIL: TREY YINGST, PLEASE BE  SAFE.   AND JOINING US IS THE  AMBASSADOR TO THE UNITED  STATES.   AMBASSADOR, THANK YOU FOR  TAKING THE TIME. >> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME. NEIL: I KNOW A LOT OF UKRAINIAN SOLDIERS WILL BE GOING TO  POLAND TO GET UP TO SPEED ON  THESE TANKS.   YOU WERE GENEROUS ENOUGH TO  OFFER THE UKRAINIANS.   HOW LONG DO YOU THINK THAT  PROCESS TAKES? >> THE ONE THING I'M SURE OF,  AND I CAN SAY, IS THE  UKRAINIANS SHOULD BE PROVIDED  WITH ALL THEY NEED TO FIGHT THE AGGRESSION OF THE RUSSIANS.   AND THIS IS THE COALITION  FORMED MONTHS AGO TO REPEL THE  RUSSIANS INVASION AND SHOW OUR  DETERMINATION AND WILLINGNESS  TO DELIVER ALL KIND OF WEAPONS  TO UKRAINE THAT ARE NECESSARY  TO MAKE THIS MILITARY EFFORT OF OUR NEIGHBORS EFFECTIVE. NEIL: I UNDERSTAND, AMBASSADOR, BOTH PRESIDENT ZELENSKYY, AS  WELL AS PRESIDENT BIDEN PLAN  TRIPS TO YOUR COUNTRY LATER  THIS MONTH.   I DON'T KNOW WHETHER THEY'LL BE THERE TOGETHER, BUT WHAT CAN  YOU TELL US? >> I DON'T KNOW EITHER.   THE ONLY THING I KNOW IS THAT  THE DATE HAS NOT BEEN SET YET.  PREPARATIONS ARE ONGOING AND I  DO BELIEVE THAT THIS UPCOMING  POSSIBLE VISIT OF PRESIDENT  BIDEN TO OUR COUNTRY IS PROOF  OF OUR CREDIBILITY AND OUR EVER GROWING ROLE IN THIS NEW  GEOPOLITICAL CONFIGURATION.   POLAND HAS BECOME A PIVOTAL  COUNTRY NOT ONLY IN TERMS OF  HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE, BUT  ALSO IN TERMS OF OUR MILITARY  ASSISTANCE TO UKRAINE AND I  BELIEVE THAT THIS IS-- IT'S ABOUT TIME TO ELEVATE  POLAND TO THE ROLE PLAYED AND  ENJOYED BY OTHER AMERICAN LIKE, AND WITH THE RUSSIAN THREAT, I  BELIEVE THAT THIS COULD BE ONE  OF THE TOPICS OF THE POTENTIAL  CONVERSATIONS AND ALSO BETWEEN  OUR PRESIDENTS. NEIL: DO YOU KNOW ANYTHING, AND PRESIDENT ZELENSKYY HAS  MENTIONED THIS, AMBASSADOR, OF  A MAJOR RUSSIAN OFFENSIVE?   I ONLY SAY WITH THE BACK DROP,  VLADIMIR PUTIN RECRUITING TENS  OF THOUSANDS OF MORE SOLDIERS  FOR THIS EFFORT? >> TO BE FRANK, I'M NOT  TERRIBLY OPTIMISTIC ABOUT THE  DURATION OF THIS WAR BECAUSE I  THINK WE ARE GOING TO FACE  PROTRACTED CONFLICT IN THE  MONTHS TO COME.   MY IMPRESSION IS THAT WE TENDED TO OVERESTIMATE RUSSIA'S  MILITARY MIGHT BEFORE THE  INVASION BEGAN AND NOW WE TEND  TO UNDERESTIMATE IT.   I BELIEVE THAT UNFORTUNATELY  PRESIDENT PUTIN CAN STILL FLOOD THE FRONT LINES WITH MANPOWER  OR CANNON FODDER, IF YOU WILL,  AND THE RUSSIAN SOCIETY ARE  REMARKABLY RESILIENT,  UNFORTUNATELY, MUCH MORE  RESILIENT THAN WE ARE, I MEAN  THE WEST, OR THE PRO-UKRAINIAN  COALITION AND THAT'S WHY, AS I  SAID, I'M NOT VERY OPTIMISTIC  ABOUT THE DURATION.   ALTHOUGH I AM QUITE OPTIMISTIC  ABOUT THE FINAL OUTCOME OF THIS WAR AND OF COURSE, I KEEP MY  FINGERS CROSSED AS I BELIEVE  OVERWHELMING MAJORITY OF MY  FELLOW COUNTRYMEN TO UKRAINE TO EVENTUALLY WIN. NEIL: WELL, YOUR PEOPLE  CERTAINLY STAND OUT, SIR, TO  PUT IT MILDLY.   BETWEEN YOUR OFFER FOR TANKS  AND TRAINING UKRAINIANS ON  THESE TANKS AND OUR OWN WITH  ABRAMS TANKS THAT ARE COMING,  AS YOU KNOW VLADIMIR PUTIN HAS  TURNED THAT CROSSING A BIG RED  LINE.   WHAT DO YOU THINK HE MEANT BY  THAT? >> THERE'S FEAR OF ESCALATION  IN SOME WESTERN COUNTRIES AND  WE'VE ALREADY HEARD SUCH VOICES COMING FROM SOME EUROPEAN  CAPITALS, BUT I BELIEVE IT'S  MR. PUTIN  WHO ESCALATES THIS  CONFLICT.   WE DO KNOW THE ESCALATE.   P THIS IS ABOUT VERBAL THREATS  WE HAVE TO COPE WITH, OF  COURSE, WE SHOULD NOT STOP NOW. IF WE DON'T STOP PUTIN NOW  HE'LL RETURN WITH A VENGEANCE  AND WE'LL PAY A MUCH HEFTIER  PRICE IN 10, 15, OR EVEN 20  YEARS IN ANOTHER CONFRONTATION  WITH RUSSIA. NEIL: THANK YOU, AMBASSA|||EXPULSION BY WASHINGTON OF DIPLOMATS FROM RUSSIA. ALL BERG. NOW HE'S A FORMER CIA INTELLIGENCE OFFICER AND OUR GUEST TONIGHT TO CONTINUE THIS CONVERSATION. APPRECIATE YOUR TIME TONIGHT. RYAN DISMANTLING POLAND. THESE 45 SUSPECTED SPIES, AS THEY SAY, IS JUST THAT. LOURDES DUARTE: THIS JUST THE TIP OF THE ICEBERG. YOU KNOW, IT'S POSSIBLY IS, DIFFERENT TYPES OF COUNTRIES TO EXPEL OTHER DIPLOMATS, ESPECIALLY IF THERE'S A POLITICAL ISSUE THAT'S GOING ON, BUT ALSO IF THEY'RE LOCAL SECURITY SERVICE TO TO TO DO SOMETHING OR ARE THERE THEY'RE CAUGHT DOING SOMETHING THEY SHOULD BE DOING IN COUNTRY. AND SO I THINK THIS IS JUST A ESCALATING A LITTLE BIT. BUT AGAIN, SOMETHING THAT'S NOT AND REALLY UNDER CONVENTION. THE STATE CAN ACTUALLY DECLARE ANY FOREIGN MEMBER OF A DIPLOMATIC STAFF. AND REALLY THEY DON'T NEED TO PROVIDE A REASON EITHER. AND SO FOR THESE 45 SUSPECTED PERSONA NON GRATA. YOU KNOW, IT'S IT. IT'S NOT SURPRISING TO ME. AS THIS TYPE OF THING. IT LIKE I SAID, DOES HAPPEN. PROBABLY SOME OTHER INFORMATION THAT WE'RE NOT PRIVY TO YET. THAT WILL LIKELY COME IN THE IN THE UPCOMING WEEKS I WONDER WHAT'S REQUIRED TO GAIN POLAND OR ELSEWHERE. AN EMBASSY PERSPECTIVE. YOU KNOW, ALL THE STAFF WORKING THERE ACTUALLY THAT THERE ARE SO MANY IN WARSAW. AND I HEARD THAT THAT WAS ONLY HALF OF THE NUMBER OF THE RUSSIAN DIPLOMATS. THEY'RE OPERATING OUT OF A MISSION TO THE EMBASSY THERE. YEAH, ONCE YOU HAVE THAT DIPLOMATIC STATUS. THAT'S ALMOST LIKE A PROTECTION FOR YOU AND SO IF YOU'VE GOT TO THE MEDIC COVER. THERE REALLY IS NO PUNISHMENT. THE PUNISHMENT REALLY IS THAT YOU'RE BEING EXPELLED FROM THE COUNTRY AND SO, YOU KNOW, AS WE'VE ALSO NOTED AND UNHEARD OTHER STORIES IN THE MEDIA, IT LOOKS LIKE THE RUSSIANS WILL ALSO BE DOING SOME RECIPROCITY WITH ON. AND NOW ALSO THE U.S. AS WELL. AND AS WE HAVE REPORTED, TO WHY THEY WERE EXPELLED. THEY DON'T HAVE TO. THEY MAY BUT WHAT IS THEIR MOTIVATION POTENTIALLY. IS IT WEAPONS MOVEMENT OF TROOPS AND FORCES WHERE THE NATO FORCES RIGHT NOW IS IT THE REFUGEES IN THE SITUATION WHAT WOULD BE YOUR GUEST FOR ANY SPIES FROM RUSSIA. I THINK IT'S ALL OF THE ABOVE. YOU KNOW, RUSSIAN SPIES WHEN THEY'RE OPERATING IN A FOREIGN COUNTRY. YOU KNOW, THEY'RE LOOKING TO STEAL SECRETS AND CLASSIFIED INFORMATION. AND SO THEY'RE LOOKING AT MILITARY INTELLIGENCE. THEY'RE LOOKING AT STATE SECRETS. THEY'RE ALSO I MEAN, POINT IS A MEMBER OF NATO AND THEY'RE OUT A LOT OF POLAND. AND SO FOR ALL OF THOSE REASONS AND THEN JUST FOR THE MATTER OF FACT, THAT ANYTHING THAT PUTING DEEMS A NATIONAL-SECURITY INTEREST. GAIN INTELLIGENCE ON. AND SO FOR THOSE YOU KNOW, I DEFINITELY THINK THAT THOSE ARE THE PRIMARY ONES. LAUREN MAGIERA: AND NO ONE MEAN, THE PRESIDENT RIGHT NOW IN BELGIUM, THE STAKES ARE HIGH FOR IN THIS IN THIS TRIP RIGHT NOW FOR WEEKS INTO THE WAR. HOW HOW? HOW I GUESS MY QUESTION IS HOW CONCERNED ARE YOU ABOUT THE PRESIDENT'S SAFETY ABOUT THESE DIPLOMATIC TALKS AND WHERE ELSE RUSSIA MAY HAVE SPIES. I'M KEEPING AN EYE ON EXACTLY WHAT'S BEING SAID. I THINK WE'RE DEFINITELY KEEPING AN EYE ON WHAT'S GOING ON. BUT OUR SECRET SERVICE, YOU KNOW, THERE ARE SOME OF THE BEST AND PROTECTION PERSPECTIVE. AND SO I'M NOT CONCERNED ABOUT OUR PRESIDENT'S SAFETY, BUT FOR SURE THE RUSSIANS ARE GOING TO WANT TO KNOW WHAT'S HAPPENING IN THESE TALKS. YOU KNOW, IT'S PROBABLY A TOP TIER. INFORMATION GATHERING PERSPECTIVE THAT THEY'RE GOING TO WANT TO KNOW AND HAVE SOME INSIGHT INTO. THIS WITH THE EXPERTS TALKED TO EARLIER ABOUT DESTABILIZING POLAND. IS THAT A REAL THREAT IN POLAND AND OTHER NATO NATIONS THAT NEIGHBOR UKRAINE. THEY'RE THINKING ABOUT IT AND THEY'RE PROBABLY TAKING IT AS A REAL POTENTIAL THREAT. YOU KNOW, EVEN BEFORE THE TO RUSSIA ACTUALLY INVADING GOVERNMENT AND ANOTHER ALLIES THEY WERE SAYING THIS IS HAPPENING. THIS IS GOING TO HAPPEN. AND THEN THE RUSSIANS KEPT COMING BACK AND SAYING NO, YOU KNOW, THAT'S NOT WHAT WE'RE DOING. THIS IS JUST AN BEHOLD, YOU KNOW, THE RUSSIANS STARTED DATING UKRAINE. AND SO I THINK AT THIS EVERY COUNTRY IN THAT REGION, THEY'RE GOING TO BE CONCERNED. THEY'RE GOING TO LOOK INWARD AND SAY, YOU KNOW, ARE WE READY TO PROTECT OURSELVES. ARE WE READY TO DEFEND OURSELVES. DO WE HAVE THE NECESSARY, YOU KNOW, SECURITY PROCEDURES AND POLICIES AND PROCESSES IN PLACE TO MAKE THAT, YOU KNOW, WE'RE PROTECTING OURSELVES AND WE'RE BEING PROACTIVE AND WE'RE BEING PREVENTATIVE THAN AND INTERCEPTING THAT INFORMATION. SO CRITICAL RIGHT NOW. RYAN HILLSBOR, APPRECIATE|||what in the world's going on everybody this is 
islandhoppertv coming to you from krakoff out here   in the southern part of poland right next to 
the border with czechoslovakia two different   countries but we're right there near the 
border in the second largest city here [Music]   coming to you now from krakow here in the second largest city in poland 
behind warsaw 1.7 million people live here oh they're feeding the pigeons that's 
why the pigeons are out in full force i'm working on my polish okay 
that's the marionette key   it's a big cathedral some of you have requested 
that i actually start going into those   again kind of do a loop around this little 
square here but the thing that's different about   krakow than warsaw is that [Music] 85 
of warsaw was destroyed during the war world war ii most of krakow remained intact cause i don't know try not to miss any angles here there's 
so much going on down in this little   area right here what a cool place huh so we're 
just going to cruise around the old town here i   actually got a hotel here usually i stay at hilton 
or marriott but i decided this time no i will stay   right in the heart of it all makes 
things easy so here is a look at my hotel 75 night hotel [Applause] i actually leave it four in the morning 
so this works perfect because it's right   next to the train station let's see what's in this building here if you guys are enjoying this video so far hit 
the like button crack off is definitely more   popping off than i expected it's tsukunishi that's 
what this is oh okay so it's like a indoor mall we'll just kind of cruise right through here huh we got shops so i'll be honest with you i 
really enjoyed um warsaw but but uh i really like krakow [Music] so i would say if you uh wanted me to rank them 
so far i'm giving crack off the tip of the cap   just just because it's that good i'm looking to try and get on the sleeper train at midnight if i can to prague this was actually intended to be just 
a quick layover but now that i'm here   i'm like i don't know if this might even be 
better in prague i've been to prague before as you guys know prague is considered 
one of the best cities in all of europe this one here is just i mean what am i going to compare it to munich what do we got going on here man there's so much action here i don't 
even need to cut chop and edit anything out   it's like there's so much 
vibrance going on here i did eat   some good lunch today so maybe that's 
what's got me in such a great mood   arizona drinking food let's give it a 
whirl [Music] salitos margarita [Music]   okay so the good food showed up i 
got the steak fries and some salad   with my of course margaritas 
arizona style nice steak oh yeah i'm going on here oh animals [Music] there's a lot of area around this uh old 
town but most of this remained intact   after world war ii compared to warsaw warsaw got 
destroyed this one most of it was left intact okay i'm gonna have to say compared to 
all the cities that i've been so far   this one's probably number one of all the cities 
i went on this tour between norway oslo stockholm   i really like stockholm um copenhagen there's a big castle down here that you 
gotta go to it's like the number one castle   i'll go back into that square and 
go to the marinacci the the uh   church cathedral later but i 
want to do this walk for you guys so you know what to expect when you come here   they have these in vienna i 
remember i seen these in vienna wow man let me just show you this wow what an incredible city this one is i was 
actually told by some people that they love   this this one but i had no idea what to expect 
i i you know you get recommendations from people and then you actually go there and 
you're like what the heck look at this   well some of you guys asked about 
public transportation there it is   we got a tram like i said i rode the train in 
i i want to call it a high speed i mean i felt   like at times it was going high speed i felt at 
times it was going regular speed like maybe 55 so but i would say overall that 
was probably a high speed train   the train station in warsaw was 
pretty crazy that was incredibly busy you guys can actually watch that 
video because i'm going to post it   on vertcam my other channel you can 
see the whole experience i actually   wrote business class because that was 
all they had available was first class so there's a castle down here 
which is where i'm headed next   it's right on the river this is the same 
river that's actually connected to warsaw before they had actual road highways rivers 
around the world were considered the first   highways those were the real highways before 
cars came about so you could take a boat   along the river and the river does most of 
the pushing unless you're going upstream it's way easier to go downstream than a river wow you guys haven't already subscribed to this 
channel and you like videos like this go ahead and   do that because i'm right in the heart of europe 
during the peak season and we're going south well after prague we're going to start going south that includes hungary i've never been 
to hungary that includes slovakia   greece and then into the balkans well before i get 
to greece i got to go through the balkans right so croatia it's all on the on the to-do list i've got my energizer bunny 
pack on as i'm traveling around and i'll pick up when i get to the i say 
energizer bunny because it does take some   stamina to do this much traveling i did most 
of canada now i'm doing a lot of year up here   i usually do the western part of europe so 
instead of doing the west i'm doing the east but it does require stamina this morning i almost 
decided to take a day off but i was like no   i gotta go crack off and i'm glad 
i made that decision but i almost   took a day off i do need a day off 
soon though let's see here what is this so much going on over here [Music] hello all right we're coming up 
to the castle zamac krolesky this is considered by many to be the main 
thing to see and do when you come to poland i mean if you come to krakow but also i would say 
that a lot of people really recommend going to the   concentration camp of auschwitz-birknow 
i'm not going to be going over there   because i'm pushing south well actually i will have to come back for that it's i've seen youtube 
documentaries from other youtubers   who did a full tour of that place and 
it felt like i was there literally   kind of like what you guys feel 
when you watch these videos okay i may have found the entrance but even 
then it looks like there's a ticket required it's my first time here there's those vines 
up close okay now i'm getting portugal vibes   oh there's mountains around here 
oh this place is fantastic wow oh my gosh those vines amazing   how old is that like one planter 
it's got to be more than one plant there's got to be one plant covering 
the whole building thankfully it's brick yesterday was rain and warsaw 
this time of day it was beautiful sunny warm afternoon and bam in came the rain and dried up all the sun oh 
you can go in the visitor center here let's see i was like do i just walk around the whole 
thing here or there an entrance let's see   oh there is the tickets you got to stand in line 
see if i can get you a price at least i'm more   interested in going to the waterfront right now 
but if i had more time i would explore this place okay if anyone knows how much it costs 
to go in there there's no sign oh man look at that oh wait did i just walk in 
without getting a ticket okay so this is all you can walk around here for 
free but if you wanted to go inside the actual   church or any of these it's like 
individual tickets for each building   and there's about six or seven 
different tickets that you can buy for example to go in one of these buildings 
it might be like seven dollars or six euro wow and by the way thank you to victoria she's 
from ukraine she's been here for three months   she works at the castle very helpful 
told me a lot of different things   it was very useful for me 
look how beautiful this is wow is that like brass or bronze 
it's an incredible castle there's the astronomical clock or just regular 
clock i think every clock's astronomical oh look at that green door like a copper door 
that did not look like paint that looked like   green metal incredible structure this is okay there's mariniski land right up there on the bell tower whenever you see these really flat stones like 
this compared to the cobblestone that's usually   put there because they would take stage 
coaches on that this is a stagecoach pass cobblestone in between walking paths kids love this place so funny they're just so excited to walk up and down it or slide down these rocks here oh wow they got archery oh almost at the target but we're coming up to the uh waterfront here   so the vestula river also connects 
to warsaw like i said previously let's get up on this waterfront here all right 
so we're gonna go on the river here and they   have these little boats that go up and down 
the river i'm gonna try and get on one here   so let's go down there oh here comes the boat okay what's down there it's open it's okay let's just walk around up here okay [Music]   this one looks a little bit better than the one 
they were originally gonna put me on [Music] i'm gonna get a drink it's a nice little spot right 
here below decks actually all right let's go check out what's going on she's driving dude [Music] trying out all aspects of this boat here   okay so we are back out onto the 
waterfront here along the river it's a good way to relax drink a beer and that sheraton's in a interesting placement it's a big boat right there man i currently have a blister on the back of 
my foot and the reason is is because when i got   new socks they were real thin compared to the 
nike socks that i was wearing before like the   nice sports athletic socks i just got 
some regular black socks in sweden   and they are not made for walking and the shoes 
that i got they just between the new shoes   and the socks so i'm kind of 
like walking with a bit of a limp but it only it's only bad when i've been sitting 
for a little while and i start walking again   once i start walking i just kind of becomes 
callous so i don't know if i want to pop it   or wait for it to just become 
a callous or what we'll see oh there's a little nice area on the 
waterfront and back up towards the castle   got some good vibes going on down here bubble man kids love the bubble man oh man are you feeling bubbly you want 
to drink some bubbly champagne okay i'm kind of taking the 
back road back here pod well in sure that's not how you say it but this is like 
a park here nice little green zone with some   construction going on but we'll keep cruising 
this little path back since it's different than   the way i came in all right coming back over to 
the square here let's see what else we can find that was just nuts just came roaring through here   watch this watch how fast these 
guys come through here watch this that's nothing compared to the last guy and the last guy in a fire truck he came the guy the first guy in the fire 
truck came through here like incredibly fast i mean i was like dude you should have saw people were like 
panicked to get out of the way that guy must be a five alarm fire or something   man we are in prime time in europe 
right now this is an absolute prime time i knew once i got out of scandinavia 
things were going to light up like this   scandinavia was like relaxed compared to this and even scandinavia was intense   but the weather out here is just way 
better look at these beautiful horses all right back in the square horse drawn carriage this place 
is going to light up at night man it's it's gonna absolutely light up at night   sunday night though i'm sure 
last night was more lit up amazing amazing all right let's go in here see what's up okay oh no cameras hard rock cafe black marieke and that is the saint mary's i went 
inside there i can't film in there but i will say   what i saw in there was quite impressive 
so when you visit here if you want to see   an impressive site you might want to go in okay 
so we're coming back towards where my hotel is this will be interesting because it's uh six 25 now here a band a marching 
band is this like a street performer [Music] yeah street performance i gotta tip these guys what are they gonna do oh they're getting rowdy okay you guys say we take a look at this apartment   okay we've got these instructions for our 
gola apartment going to the fifth floor all right so this was a 75 hotel right 
in old town gotta find my room here okay it's getting more and more 
unique out here wow okay i'm in   my room like i said it was a 75 a night hotel 
right here in the city center let's see my view and my view okay well there's the square so 
i'm like still right in the middle of it all and just like that that's going to conclude 
this episode of island hopper tv from krakow   poland hope you guys enjoyed this is just a 
night view here how busy it gets even on a   sunday night and we will see you guys on the next 
one watch some more of these other videos [Music]   you|||good morning and welcome back to krakow everyone 
happy weekend hope everyone is doing well a little   bit of a chill day yesterday so we're feeling 
a bit more refreshed today we're heading to   a local park there's going to be it 
looks like there's like a couple of   things there to do yeah so we're going 
to go check and just see what it's about   we've also got um a couple of things 
planned for later we've head into   it looks like a really nice restaurant yeah uh and 
then we are headed to a vodka bar which is highly   recommended in the videos yeah uh in the comment 
section so we're gonna go check out the vodka bar   and try some different vodka flavors so that 
should be really fun yeah really excited for that um we have made it to park h jordana they've got some 
rules no fireworks no fires no drinking no litter and whatever that is yeah we're gonna 
check it out yeah looks it's been it   snowed overnight last night so it looked 
really tuning in still a little bit of snow so we're just gonna have a walk around and see 
what we come across what's on offer in park jordan   they've got like loads of these statue 
heads going down in like a big circle   there's a little bit of information but 
they kind of remind me of the if they've   seen haunted mansion the film they kind of 
remind me of the statue heads there they sing uh yeah the statue heads in the film 
sing that not the ones in the park uh the statues seem to go all around 
we can't tell if they're like um   where they're buried but it seems 
to be like one big memorial to   um just like soldiers and stuff from the wall yeah 
there was like all sizes they'd use another water   like authors and soldiers just a 
bunch of important people i guess   okay there looks as if there's some sort of 
little cafe coming up here yeah coffee shop   um there's a couple of like kids play things 
and there's just this massive polar bear and be reindeer last one to think about we got we've just come to this spot now it seems 
there's some sort of like outdoor like laid orbit which i guess would normally be filled up with 
water in the summer but they've obviously empty   yeah and i think there's some like seats up there 
there's some changes here and there seems to be a   big stadium here i'm not sure who plays in 
it but it's fairly big so i'm assuming it's   one of like krakow's main teams i'll have a look 
now hey uh where's lovely there whizzler of izzler and you've got this big park area it's 
like pretty big climbing from there yeah you can imagine this place is quite 
busy in the summer oh yeah definitely okay sometimes class we're just back in the 
apartment now just chilling out we've got about   40 minutes before we are headed to the vodka 
bar um and we're on 999 subscribers so we just so we just uh we've got it up on the 
live thing wait till you go to a thousand   which might be like a half hour but we got enough 
just in case would be cool to see it don't go to   a thousand more but um yeah we're gonna head 
to the vodka bar so we're gonna get ready   and head out and try some different flavor 
vodkas yeah let's get wrecked here we've just hit won uh yeah we've just hit a thousand we are going 
to the vodka bar now so thanks for subscribing   and we hope everyone is enjoying the videos 
we're gonna go out to celebrate yeah so we'll   see where we are a million people in the crowd 
but i only see your face and all the lights   and as the bass keep pounding on me 
baby i really wanna make you mine loads of different flavors of vodka so we've got okay it's stronger than i thought it was going 
to be i thought it was going to be like weaker but it is actually quite strong i'm going to try 
the chocolate one now this one's really thick i mean it's nice he just said give me a bunch of 
traditional ones and we didn't look   when he was pouring them so we don't 
know what that one is in the freezer i don't know what it is is someone in the comments actually recommended   elderberry i thought it was 
going to be like elder flowers we're just gonna like try all these um so 
apparently it's like disrespectful to just   shorter so you sit there and like properly 
taste the vodka and stuff so we're gonna   try them all now and then we'll let you know 
what our favorite ones are which ones to avoid came in yeah whoever comes out of berry it was a 
very good recommendation can you give me another   one please you want another one no i don't always 
no i don't want another one it was an experience but we are pretty much almost 
done we've got a couple of uh the lightweights carbon one 
the background one's quite nice we've come to a restaurant called rizzesnia 
and it's called ribs on fire so we've actually   ordered 2.5 kilograms of ribs between the 
four of us so we'll show you when it arrives yes we've ordered 2.5 kilos of ribs and this 
is what it looks like and we've ordered some   fries as well to go there we got the bbq flavors 
there's different flavors you could do barbecue   sweet chili maple and hoisin 
i think so let's give it a try that was like melt in your mouth it's so good it 
literally just like falls off the bones so easily   okay we've been given some shots 
i don't know what it is probably okay one two three we're just gonna head to uh another bar now 
but here there are a couple of underground   bars so we might check on those out but 
we're definitely gonna go to another dreams bar true you|||hey guys in this vlog we will take you with us on 
a trip to a beautiful province of Poland called   Mazury where we went to spend Christmas with 
family the city of Mragovo which was our final   destination is located quite far away from where 
we live this time we decided to go there by train   the whole journey took us around six and a half 
hours and we were quite tired when we arrived   so that day we only went for a 
short evening walk next to the lake   and then passed through the city center of Mragowo 
to tell the truth it was my first Christmas with   so much of snow around so i was very excited to 
go for a longer walk in the forest the next day okay so we are out for a walk in the forest 
and it's Christmas day and we've just   eaten a huge Christmas breakfast 
so we're full and now we need some   walk and we're in the forest we're going 
around the lake which is huge and requires   around two hours maybe more or no? well in summer 
it doesn't require that much time but now it's   snowing we'll see how the road is the road 
is amazing and it's snowing so much it's like   a real Christmas because in Georgia we hardly 
have snow, well, in Tbilisi, for the New Year,   so usually it's plus and it doesn't feel like 
Christmas or the New Year that much and here   it is like minus six, it's snowing and it was 
just a beautiful sunny day, though now the sun is   already behind the clouds, it will get dark in an 
hour or two. there are two lakes here in Mragowo,   one is very big and another one, which 
we're passing right now, i don't know if   you can see behind, it's relatively small, but 
they're both covered with ice and there is snow   all over this ice so it just feels like 
we're in some kind of winter fairy tale   and this winter forest is just like, i don't know 
if it can be seen in the camera, but it's just   amazing.
There are actually many people   walking on Christmas day and some people even work 
out, like, they're out for jogging. admire this   kind of people! yeah so hopefully we'll make it 
before it's dark because it gets dark quite fast hello oh they think i'm gonna feed them, 
right ? sorry babies, i don't have anything.   we are being attacked hello sorry babies they're so pretty look at them the next day we decided to drive to a nearby 
village to have some fun in the snow together   with Phillip's family, i truly love visiting 
that place since there are few people living   there and you feel completely immersed 
in the beauty of the surrounding nature   at the place we had lots of 
fun sliding down a little hill   i have to admit i was excited just like a little 
kid and then i saw this  oh my god that is crazy okay, I've scared them, seems like |||If you are having a business in Poland and you are employing foreigners Most likely you will face the situation when the work permit will expire in this case You have to fill the documents to have it extended This matter can be handled in three ways first You can go to voivodeship and apply for it personally You can also send a document by post or you can do it electronically The work permit for foreigners is usually given for three or five years So sometimes if you want to keep your employee longer you have to extend it for three or six months The application for extension of work permit should be delivered no earlier than 90 days before the expiry date and No later than 30 days before the expiry date. The submission process itself is fairly simple You have to fill out the documents delivered to the voivodeship and wait for the decision The authorities have 30 days to ask for your application If there is a large traffic, they will have 60 days|||Jesh today we're going to look at a 
cabaret from amm and you've got to   imagine Sports commentary on the most 
mundane things such as a supermarket opening hello hello e o warming up gin ginch 10 pinch five pinch it's like listening to horse racing 
you know the speed horse racing commentary that is the speed of it but basically 
um it's Sports commentating on a supermarket opening the door open the door this guy so he's basically the the news reporter 
is basically been looking at other things that   he's opened this guy cuz he's Mr uh zit z z anyway 
um he's obviously opening this this supermarket   and other things he's actually opened uh zipper an 
umbrella 296 is Samurai branded brand apple wine so he's not opened anything uh major let's just say fr yeah fair play to this guy though the 
speed that he's talking uh and and him   having to actually remember this it is 
very difficult to keep up unfortunately   there is a slight delay in the opening uh 
but it's it's it's talking about the most   mundane things like what is the social side 
of the crowd at the moment do you know what I   mean how the crowd behaving before this exciting 
Supermarket opening I just just insane and very bizarre me there there was rumors that's so good there 
was rumors that there'll be prizes for the   first first entrance TVs cameras Etc no no 
the the prizes are attractive colored pens   12 packs of garden soil and a set of laundry 
clips that is that is why people want to get   there soon because colored pens yeah colored pens 
beat a new camera hands down right God this is so silly for it's like the r hello hello m m he's done he's done trampled a live opening of a McDonald's 
will be featured next week that was actually really impressive the 
speed of what he was doing very difficult to   keep up especially if you're not polish and are 
reading subtitles but it's it basically turned   the entry turned into a horse race jumping over 
the big gets it was like that it was insane very   difficult to keep up but I I mostly managed uh 
obviously MCH obviously did not survive uh he   got trampled on and yeah uh it's just the 
excitement of mundane things isn't it that   was that was impressive I enjoyed that um the 
it was simple it wasn't there wasn't a big St   AG presence necessary there wasn't any real um 
there was no nothing on the stage it was simply   these two and I assume the guy on the left was 
doing uh the sign language type stuff but that   was really really good really fast-paced and 
he was sweating he was sweating but a real fun   so I think Poland I don't think we get you know 
in the UK we don't really get this we probably   used to um before I was born um but it does seem 
like yes this is 2009 but you know it does seem   Poland is still getting these and so I think for 
I think a lot of Polish people think this is quite   old-fashioned but for for us that I don't think 
get this anymore I think it's quite refreshing   for us uh like these these little sketches um 
are just fun silly um and just I don't know   it just takes you away from the norm doesn't it 
and and it's that bit of enjoyment but that was   really really good I thoroughly enjoyed Annie 
muuu Supermarket thank you so much for watching   please do like and hit that subscribe button to 
support the channel and I will catch you next time Papa|||Equinix is the world’s digital infrastructure company.  We connect the world to enable people to work, 
watch, play, shop and learn. This is the mission of every employee here at Equinix.  For more than 20 years our global platform 
network of interconnected IBX data centers  have enabled the innovations that enrich our work, life and planet.  This is where more than 10,000 of the world’s digital leaders place their critical digital infrastructure and make their visions a reality.  Our customers depend on these cutting 
edge, critical environments  and the people that keep them operational 
- every hour of every day.  It is important for me to be working in a critical environment knowing that what I am doing is key to making the world go around,  and having the best team around me to make 
every day interesting Our number one priority is our clients.  Without them functioning at their best  we wouldn’t be able to enjoy most of the services 
we all use every day. It’s so rewarding knowing that I’m a part 
of their success with Equinix. We are growing in Poland. Join us.  Where going to work is making a difference  and where every day is different.  If you’re looking for a change in direction, 
join a team that not only cares  about where you have come from but 
about where you want to go.  We are a company that is really going places 
and we want to take you with us.  Your future is here, with us at Equinix. Connect with the world’s digital infrastructure company.|||Hey hey! Greetings from Warsaw, Poland's
capital. Welcome to another Tip Thursday with me, Conor the Language Tsar so in
today's video we're gonna be diving into five things you should remember if
you're gonna take a trip to Poland about Polish etiquette so let's get into
today's video! So when you guys are visiting a Polish
home, it's important to remember to bring a gift whether that's gonna be
flowers and chocolates some alcohol for the host. I know that applies to a lot
of other countries but something that you should definitely remember here in Poland.
Another thing to remember is never bring yellow chrysanthemums as a present as
they're for funerals here. So that will definitely not go down well if you bring
those as flowers. So other times you're gonna have to remember to bring a gift
to a Polish person is of course on their birthday, on Christmas and their name day.
Their name has a saint and that saint has a particular day that's also a time to
give gifts in Poland. So that's something that you mightn't have known because that's
not as universal as say a birthday present or a Christmas present in
Christian countries. So during dinner Poles tend to toast a lot and drink a lot of
alcohol so if you don't drink alcohol then you're gonna have to say 'no' multiple
times because it's not the cultural norm here. So if you decide to bring a present
alcohol well vodka is always a good choices. So this is legendary vodka from
from Belarus, Царская Поляна. Okay. Now when you go to a
Polish dinner there's gonna be copious amounts of food there so definitely go
on an empty stomach otherwise your host is gonna be
a bit offended if you're not launching yourself into everything and tasting all
the different dishes that they have here so of course pierogi are the famous
dumplings in Poland. You have bigos which is like a hunter stew you have I think
it's pronounced Zurek and I've probably butchered that which is the soup that I
had. So some other things you're gonna have to be aware of that are
traditionally Polish are cabbage, sausages, pork meat if you don't eat pork
that's another thing to be aware of and ask your host what has pork it doesn't
have pork of course but pork is a main staple of the diet here in Poland and
often all that is gonna be washed down by not just vodka but also by some
homemade liqueurs. There's some with honey they're quite popular that I've
tasted. So to address Poles it's not customary to do so by their first name
unless you really know them quite well so you should be referring to
most 'pan' for mister and 'pani' to a woman. Customs here in Poland, it's a little
less intimate than say North America where people use first names a lot sooner. Here
they tend to be more formal in terms of their greetings and a handshake is the
normal way to create men. So if you're on public transport then chivalry it's a lot
more common here than it is maybe in countries like North America or Western
Europe. You were expected to give up your seat for maybe disabled,
obviously a pregnant lady but I think that's a property universal anyways and
even for just an un-pregnant, a normal woman, a lot of men will still give up
their seat. There's more of that chivalrous culture. It's maybe a little less common
amongst younger people [but] definitely amongst older people and of course age
that you let an older person take your seat on public transport if there's no
other seat available is still the norm here in Poland and in fact it's kind of
dying out but it used to be customary and it still is amongst older poles
to kiss a lady's hand when you meet them. Isn't that very chivalrous and a
romantic custom? So most poles follow Roman Catholicism and religious holidays
are national events here so they are observed and you're not going to find
shops open on Catholic holidays for example. So just be aware of what the
Catholic calendar is if you're gonna travel here so that you're aware that
you know things mightn't be open. People may be observing religious ceremonies or
attending religious service services for example. They're at home with their
family because it's considered a family time like maybe during Easter and
Christmas are two the biggest Catholic events throughout the year and they will
of course mean that things are not operating as normal in the country so just be aware of that and be aware of when those events are taking
place before you come. So following your feedback to my recent poll that I put
out on my Instagram, my Facebook and my Twitter accounts I've decided to change
up my free video course for traveling and to change it from a general course
which was 'Traveler not a tourist' to a more specific course for here in Central/Eastern Europe. I know Poland is not technically Eastern Europe
it's actually the eastern part of Central Europe but at the same time it's gonna
be a course called 'How to survive a trip to Eastern Europe' if you want to receive
that free gift just go to the link in the description below this video. Sign up
by email. Click the link in the confirmation email that you're going to
receive and I will whisk that over to you for free, no obligation so if you
know someone is actually gonna come here to Poland definitely share this video
with them so that they are aware of some of the cultural differences that they
may experience so that they're not too shocked and they can you know not offend
anyone here in Poland so that's it from today's video 'pa pa!' or 'bye, bye' from
Warsaw, Poland and I'll see you in the next video!|||There are the joys of dancing....and then there's dancing for joy. We've found one person who personifies both. Along Route 224 in Poland...by the cemetery -- June Baker moves and grooves. She's a teacher at Boardman Center Middle School. She listens to music on her walks...and sometimes the music just takes her away.. Drivers have been recording her moves and posting it to Facebook... With more than 12 hundred shares -- But June says it's all about trying to lighten people's moods. JUNE BAKER: ONE LITTLE GIRL SHE AND HER MOM PULLED OVER AND WE HAVE TO TELL YOU, WATCHING YOU DANCE MAKES ME SO HAPPY. June says people will honk and giver her thumbs up... But, when she first stated doing this ... a cop stopped once to make sure everything was ok. [F4]20170921 PLANETARIUM-VO|||caritas poland has been on 
the front lines of providing   humanitarian aid to ukrainians after 
their country was invaded in february we are making 40 000 sandwiches every day 
as well as hot meals for people who have   crossed the border it's not that there aren't 
any stores but these people have to be fed   so the first step is feeding all these people 
father marcin izicki the director of caritas   poland describes how the organization has 
been providing aid and relief to refugees   seeking safety across the border he 
explains that karitas poland has raised   10 million euros to help different dioceses 
address the refugee crisis in their area most refugees want to go to big cities that 
have the most to offer like warsaw and krakow   but there is another group of refugees who 
don't want to move away from the border   they want to stay closer to their homes in ukraine 
hoping that soon they will be able to return   so they don't want to be far away 
when they find a place near the border   like the reception place they want to stay 
there in the first 30 days after the invasion   caritas sent about 500 trucks filled with 
food medicine and even electric generators   to ukraine they also reached out to other 
organizations to collect food for the refugees there has never been such a great mobilization 
of polls and such an enormous generosity   because on the one hand they offered 
places to sleep but also financial help   people open both their hearts and their 
wallets with open hearts and wallets the   people in poland are doing everything 
they can to help their neighbor in need you|||hi and welcome to the travel boss today's video is about the top 10 things to do in Turin Toran is a city in Poland that is very old Toran is one of the most important places in Poland it it used to be surrounded by a huge wall and now it is full of history art entertainment and much more to really understand Toran and how people used to live you have to visit the old town before we start our top 10 please click the Subscribe button and tell us what is your favorite thing to do and to run in the comments number 10. explore the fascinating Teutonic castle ruins this building is one of the oldest in toru that is still standing the castle was built along the Vistula River in the middle of the 13th century it is now in Ruins this Castle was very important because it was close to the border and had a lot of strong ways to attack and defend the outside walls of the castle have been kept so you can still see the Castle's huge layout number nine go on a walking tour of turun this specialized walking tour will last about three hours and take you to some of the best places in toru you will learn about main Square the Town Hall Street Mary's Church and Street John's Cathedral from your tour guide you'll also learn about Nicolas Copernicus who was the most famous person from Tehran number eight discover the unique history behind Terran Cathedral toru Cathedral is also called Saint Catholic Cathedral John the Baptist and John the Evangelist and it is a great place to enjoy Gothic Beauty some very important people have been baptized in the baptismal font and there is a lot you can learn more about the building the paintings on the walls are from the 14th and 15th centuries and they are in great shape number seven learn medieval gingerbread cooking techniques at the Living Museum of gingerbread now you might be wondering if we've gone crazy a museum made of gingerbread that people can visit what the heck does that mean well to be honest we thought the same thing but now we're proud to say that this museum is one of the best things to do in Turin on the first floor you'll find out everything you need to know about how gingerbread was made in the Middle Ages number six discover the city's Secrets at the regional Museum in Turin this museum is in the historic Old Town of toru which is a great place to be in 1997 it was added to the list of UNESCO world heritage sites inside the museum you can look at things from the time when this area was the most important economically and politically number five step back in time at House of Turin Legends at House of Turin Legends you can see how people lived in the Middle Ages in Torah the unique attraction is fun for people of all ages because it is both a museum and a play here you can see things like a treehouse a townhouse rafts and a torture chamber some of the Legends you will learn about are the ones about the founding of Turin the Leaning Tower and the Tubidy Bell you get to take part in the shows which include props and costumes number four wander around the ethnographic museum enjoy a unique experience at the ethnographic Museum which has displayed both inside and outside this museum is in an ottoman mansion from the 18th century it is just outside of the old town area you can easily explore the museum on your own thanks to audio guides and pamphlets walk through thatched roof houses and step into traditional kitchens to see how people used to live in Old polish Villages number three explore the center of Contemporary Art this Art Center opened in 2008 and it's all about art from the present in addition to the displays and Exhibits the center often holds seminars and lectures it also puts on educational events to help younger people learn about the different kinds of Modern Art this is great for when you need a break from all the historical sites number two learn to make gingerbread Museum purnika this museum is in the old part of town which is known for its gingerbread you can learn how to make traditional gingerbread by taking part in an interactive show find out how people made dough in the Middle Ages then you can use one of the molds to make your own gingerbread you can also get a good look at how flour was once made with millstones number one go wild at tauren Zoo Botanical Garden the tauren zoo is on the edge of the city and has been there since the 1800s this small Zoo has been through good times and bad times like World War II a little more than 200 animals from about 80 different species live here even though it might not be as good as other zoos in typical European cities this is a good way to spend a couple of hours so these are the top 10 best things to do in touring please like the video If you enjoyed our list and share your views in the comments also don't forget to subscribe to our channel the travel boss thanks for watching|||How many foreigners of what origin actually live in Poland? We'll find out that and much more right after the intro. Hello again and welcome to my YouTube channel. If you should stop by for the first time, I would be really happy if you subscribe to the channel and activate the bell immediately. Then you will always be notified when I upload a new video. Many, many, many thanks for that. But let's go a bit more towards the main topic and talk about migration and the proportion of foreigners here in Poland. I recently had a very interesting conversation with a friend I met through my channel . This is Micah. So greetings go out to Micha here as well. Michael asked me if I knew what the immigration figures were like in my region. So now for German or generally for foreigners. Somehow I could n't really answer the question completely because I didn't know that until then. Then I started to do a little research and see if I could find out anything about the percentage of foreigners and immigration here in my region. Then I came across a very, very interesting site and even an official government site where we have really, really interesting statistics. Well, first of all we can see there how many foreigners, let me say what kind of foreigners, that is, the origin of the foreigners, live in Poland. What status they have, what age they are, what gender they are and so on and immediately. We can even do comparisons like immigration in 2022 versus immigration in 2015. It's all really visible here. This is also an official government website. In order not to keep you in suspense any longer, I'll just show you my screen so that you even know what I'm talking about. So I think you can hear that too. I'm really, really excited about the site. So really euphoric. Whenever I saw that, it really had a, I have to say, a small WOW effect for me, what I get to see here. And this is the page migracje.gov.pl The "gov" is the abbreviation for government, which translates as state means I'll say it now. So we also see that it is a state side. On the site we also have a choice of three languages. Polish, English and Russian. Let's stick with Polish. I think Polish will be my stronger language out of the three languages. Let's just go to the first statistic here. Click here. And although we already have the portfolio of Poland here. So the map of Poland divided into the whole województwa. Depending on where we go, we also see what kind of województwa that is. Here we have eg Zachodniopomorskie. Here we are in Lubuskie. Here Pomorskie and so on and immediately. Here in the circle, the number I'm in here. This is actually the number of foreigners in the województwa that is being presented here. E.g. myself, I live in the województwa Łódzkie. Here we have 44843 foreigners. If we just click on it now, we'll have the first statistics. So this is now województwa Łódzkie, year 2022. Of the 44,843 foreigners we have here...... ....is this also subdivided here, how many, for example, here a "pobyt czasowy" that means a temporary stay to have. Here, for example, there are 37,513. Or a "pobyt stałe" that is here a permanent residence of 4206. There are also some terms here that I may not, I would say, fully understand. Or can not quite understand. But that has nothing to do with the language. Because I just don't understand what that means. For example, down here we also have Ochrona uzupełniająca, which translates to don't know, something like supplementary protection. So I do n't understand in what context someone should get supplementary protection. If maybe there is someone here from my viewers who knows about it. Or maybe even work at the office here in Poland? Or maybe have any contacts? please contact me I would like to have a chat with this person. And maybe a little more detail on these things here. This is really quite interesting here. We'll go into that in a moment and really filter where how many Germans live in which województwa most. But let's look further here. Then we also see age here, for example. How many are under 20 here. For example, we have 26,000 foreigners between the ages of 20 and 39. For example, we have 60 over 80-year-olds. Then we now also have the gender that we can filter. This is where we start, for example, and this is just the województwa Łódzkie. Here we have also divided it into countries, which type or origin of foreigners live in this województwa. We currently have 27,164 Ukrainians here. Then on the second place we have people from Belarus. Here we have, for example, somewhere, there were also Germans. Right here Niemcy. This is German translated. Here, for example, a województwa Łódzkie we have 223 Germans live. We can now also, let me say, filter in a completely different way. Maybe we can click this away now. Is it_ wait a minute.... wait a minute... Alright, let's do it again. Now we have a page here too. And now, for example, we can do it here too.... Unfortunately, you have to be able to speak Polish for that. We can go to "kraj" here. "Kraj" means land. We can just say "Never" for Niemcy here, for example. Abbreviation Niemcy. So, let's hit the road. Now it shows us where, how many Germans live in which województwa. Here we can see very clearly. In the województwa "zachodniopomorskie" that is up by the sea. So that's where we have most of the Germans living. The most German living. Here we have around 6102 Germans. You can also click on it. That is now here in general I see straight. Or? Yes, exactly! That's just in general here now. But okay. I actually wanted to show you something else. Let's move on to something else. Let's do it again here. Or exactly, I'll show you something completely different. Let's just go to "wykresy" here. We have a folder up here. And here have "wykres". And here I can now also enter, for example..... ..... Niemcy. And here we now see from the Germans. Here, for example, we now have 16,444 Germans and of these 16,444 Germans from the year 2022..... So there is another thing that I don't quite understand here. Because actually German citizens are citizens of the European Union. It also says, for example, Registered Citizens of the European Union. Permanent residency, i.e. registered citizens with permanent residency of the European Union. Then we only have permanent residence here. But I am of the opinion that every citizen from Germany is a citizen of the European Union. But well, let's just move on. Then we have that here too, for example how many Germans live here. That's 18,000 Germans. So now all over Poland we have 18,000 Germans living here. Here it is shown again in a bar chart. How many Germans live in which województwa. So very interesting here. Now we can make a comparison, for example. For example 2022 with the year let's say 2015. This will probably take a few seconds now. Exactly, down here we see the ball loading here. So, and now we have here.... Actually, something should be flashing here for 2015. Exactly, and now we have, for example, a comparison between 2015 and 2022. In 2015 we had 7432 Germans, e.g. in the województwa "Zachodniapomorskie" and today we have 6102. Here we have another direct comparison between 2015 and 2022 by the German immigrants. So very very interesting here. Here we have the year again. Here we can then filter gender again. Let's see the age of the Germans here again. We can also do Germans, for example, with I don't know.... We can just do it... Let's just take Germans and then we'll add them as well... Can I choose something else here? For example, exactly, for example, we can now compare with the French. And now he should actually show us both countries. And then shows us the comparison right away. At least he should. He's loading a bit here now. Wait a minute... Why isn't he showing us this the way I'd like it to be? okay... But now we have here.... .....wait a minute. Do we just have to do it differently here? Now he should actually have us too...... Exactly and now we also have a comparison in the year 2022, for example. How many Germans have migrated here and how many French people have immigrated. So very very interesting. Now I'll show you something really, really great that I've also found here. And we still have here..... Where was that now? A complete map. Where was that? Wait a minute... I have to click this away, exactly, and then we'll go to "Świat" up here. "Świat" means world. Let's click on this and now we have a world map. Now we can see from this world map, for example, if we now click on a certain country, we just saw we had about 18000 Germans in Poland. And if we now look at Germany, for example... Here we also see the 18,000. So now here under exports we see 18,046 Germans living in Poland. For example, if we click on Poland, obviously nothing. Now, for example, we have Belarusians 61,000. Here we have 387,000 Ukrainians. We also have Russians here. I just allowed myself to have fun and then just looked. Then I also looked here at North Korea. So there really are 5 North Koreans in Poland. So that's really an insanely cool statistic. Personally, I'm really excited about the statistics. Here you can really filter everything and so on and immediately. Here also with this bar chart. Really, to me that's just really awesome. I don't know if there is something like that from Germany. At least I don't know of anything like that in Germany. Here we also have something very interesting for people. Here I also have official pages, for example from immigration authorities, I think that should be the case now. And here we also have addresses of immigration authorities from all over Poland. Where are they, with their address, and so on and immediately. Here for example Łódź Piotrkowskas. That's where I live. This is also an Office for Foreigners Affairs and Citizenships. So as said. I would be interested to know if there is something like this in Germany. At least I don't know of anything like that in Germany. I would be interested in what you personally say about this statistic. So I'm really excited about this statistic. I think you can see that too. I can hardly hold myself here. I would be really interested in your opinion on this topic. Anyway, thank you for watching my video to the end. I would be very happy about a LIKE and a subscription. If you liked this video, feel free to share it with your friends if you feel like it. And if you don't want to, you don't have to. I'm also really, really open to negative criticism. Even if you give a thumbs down. I really have no problem with that. But I would also be happy if you give me a thumbs down, maybe you can also leave me a comment why you actually do it. I always try to improve my channel from time to time and also respond a little to the community and viewers. If I get dislikes, which is very seldom the case, but if I get a dislike, I would actually be interested in why I get it. With that in mind, I'm glad you watched my video to the end. Stay healthy and see you next time. Ciao|||good morning from Warsaw guys I'm in Poland if you haven't figured it out my decision to come here stems from my background my parents are polish both of them are from Poland I'm born in the US so I'm an American with polish parents or in the US we just say polish American that's easy enough my parents are both from Poland and they spent a lot of time invested in making sure that I am familiar with what Poland is polish school on Saturdays dance groups that were polish polish folk dance that is growing up I spent a lot of my summers in Poland I basically came here every other year until I was 13 every time I came basically every time was with my parents so my view of Poland and my ideas about Poland are very much one sided sculpted through the eyes of my parents and the Polish community back in Chicago which was basically basically its roots its strongest roots are based in the 80s the fact that my whole view of Poland is very much one sided isn't something I realized until I met my polish friends in Tokyo like marching like Chris and then there are others as well but Chris of course was one of the bigger influences here and it kind of boggled my mind because I had this whole idea set for about 23 years I'm here for some of my own self-discovery as corny as that sounds that's what I'm doing here so I thought it'd be cool to show you guys Poland from a foreigners perspective that's me um there are some things that'll be pretty familiar for me some things that probably will really surprise me for all the Polish viewers please help me out as much as you can let me know if something awesome is going on and I would love to meet up with a lot of the viewers here so send me messages and I'll see if what I can organize here's a view of my window again it's very nice it's the Palace of Culture and science and it's the tallest building in Poland but more on that in another vlog my plan for today I'm going to workout first that I have to pop into the Japanese embassy then I'm going to edit the yesterday's vlog and then I'm gonna do shopping did my workout weightlifting followed by high intensity intervals I'm pretty pumped up now I have to go to the Japanese embassy I just picked up my new awesome Japanese business visa which makes me one of the first if not the first person from Poland with this type of visa in Japan it's funny but there's just not a lot of us in Japan this is my last day in Insadong tomorrow I'll be moving to Gangnam and I want to say this place where I'm staying this is the best hotel I've stayed at and they're not paying me to say this I just want you to know if you'll get a good price in this hotel like I did eighty dollars per night this is a steal there's the gym there's a swimming pool everything's included in the price the standards are very high and you get a whole apartment as opposed to just a hotel room so you have a kitchen and everything and the Insadong area is one of the best areas you can stay in in Seoul if you're a tourist because you're close to all the palaces you're close to Myung dong so shopping area you you're close to John GOG which is like a night entertainment area we're close to Insadong itself which is also interesting you can get to Itaewon pretty quick you can get to Honda pretty quick I just love staying here this is the best place I stay then that said before anything yesterday's episode I'm going to use the bathhouse so I found a place to eat it's not necessarily Polish food but I am way too hungry too freshly squeezed orange juice yayyy and a salad and some potatoes important things worth noting about Poland water is never free at restaurants you can get a SIM card almost anywhere for as little as like two dollars and then you got to load it up at this what that's not us at which I guess is golden pavilions and it seems like it's basically a big shopping malls I found a hair straightener this guy's got nothing on you Stu now I'm seeing Patrick and we're gonna do some shopping and food I'm really sad about having to leave this hotel tomorrow operation work egg kimchi darling three inputs so much when I go to Japan really this is a real this building behind me is a Myeongdong Cathedral it's one of the biggest Christian churches in Korea let's check it out Oh we incidentally stumbled upon a concert in the Cathedral it's an interesting place to see especially because of the paintings on the wall you can see Saints and wearing traditional Korean robes so I'm guessing Korean Saints it has to be noted that Christianity is the most popular I think religion in Korea Christian majority is Protestant but in Korean terms region is more syncretic so for example even though your católica in the present you would still you would still the Desa which is you know pay tribute to your ancestors so in Korean terms it's more mixed I'd say hey guys I'm just here looking at shoes because shoes finally fit me and I ran into ultra wrong I guess I'll be getting some of that now time for some groceries holy crap yoghurt selection in Poland is huge cheese cheese more cheese I got myself a jacket hair straightener SIM card and some groceries keep trying to walk on the left side and messing up traffic hair a wall of foreign sightseeing spots let's see if there's anything from Japan got Brazil over there u.s. and another us and I ran into the best in Sebastian yes yeah I just wanted to say some things I'm really awkward in Polish so I'm very sorry I really got to figure out how to not be awkward in Polish sorry to everyone hallo Sylvia raw red sea spiced hmm we went for stir fried eel so this place is like between a street food and a restaurant right exactly the this time type of physical puts output on matzah which basically is a type of tent that usually can find nearest street and yeah it's sort of a place where community it's a street food and you know junk center beer for me this is like a perfect food experience I just love street food and the kind of dirty places this is my my type this is all they wanted to actually do in Korea no it's like this like you can see in the movies here get it this place I got water water Powerade gosh that's goat cheese ham cheese red lard it's didn't ugly word in English lard toiletries and a coat all right I'm ready for you Poland you|||inkjet printers play an increasingly greater 
role in industrial applications new Solutions   enable printing on nearly any material in this 
episode we will take a look at UV LED inkjet   printers this technology is used for printing 
on media such as wood glass metals and Plastics   to learn more about it we will visit the 
Imago printer company in Warsaw we are a   company established in 2019 by a team of Engineers 
with extensive experience in digital printing we   design and manufacture inkjet printing machines 
as well as devices and Equipment thus we're able   to deliver complete technological packages to 
our customers our partners are mainly Printing   and production companies from many different 
sectors as well as manufacturers of machines   and devices we also supply the food sector 
mainly pastry shops and bakeries thank you [Music]   how does a UV inkjet printer work the principle 
is similar as in a standard office printer it is   a multi-pass inkjet device I.E it applies graphic 
design in successive rows before starting work the   device needs to determine the height of the 
object on which the printing will be applied   using an optical sensor after determining the 
parameters printing can start and the jetted   ink is immediately cured by UV lamp each Emma 
go product is developed at the r d Department   Engineers plan types of printouts to be printed 
by the device functions it needs to perform   as well as its size and Design the electronic 
systems and Control software are also designed   first a prototype device is assembled before 
it is implemented into regular production   operating assembling and maintenance manuals are 
prepared the research and development department   also performs chemical and fluid mechanics tests 
mainly for the ink used when the design is ready   the serial production of the device is launched 
employees at specific stations receive an order   and start the work first the frame is assembled 
linear guides over which a printing section will   move are screwed together they must be calibrated 
very precisely to ensure precise movements of the   section printing now the carriage on which 
the printing section will move is installed   it's upward and downward movements are driven by 
stepper Motors while a gearbox with a Servo motor   controls movement along the printing Direction 
then all modules are installed on the frame   at this stage of manufacturing the employee 
verifies against a checklist if all the   necessary steps were done in the next step 
a box controlling the device is installed   and power supply systems and motherboards are 
connected to it after that the electronic system   of the base are connected to power supplies 
sensors drives and communication systems   meanwhile the printing section is assembled 
first a carriage is screwed together it is a   support for a printhead a wiper unit is fitted 
in a cleaning station where the printhead will   stop for removal of ink and the carriage 
is installed on the precise linear guide electronic systems an ink Supply system with a 
UV lamp used to cure the printout are assembled   in the carriage now the printing section are 
fixed to the base the electronic systems are   connected and the ink Supply system is attached 
to the Head then a test start of the machine is   performed it is verified for error messages and 
whether the printing section correctly prepares   for Operation the operator also checks if the 
optical sensor reacts to the object on which   the print is to be applied at the next step the 
print head position is calibrated it must always   keep a distance of one millimeter from the 
printed surface only then 3.5 pikto liter ink   droplets hit the target point with the required 
precision finally the housing is assembled [Music]   the printer is then moved to the Quality 
Control Department where test printout are   performed and the device's appearance operating 
movements and robustness are verified the printer   is manufactured in Warsaw are exported to 16 
countries Imago also manufactures peripheral   devices offering additional possibilities 
and accelerating work with the machines [Music]|||Mr President leaders of the democratic world ladies and gentlemen during the first summit for democracy I talked about the situation in Belarus under lukashenko's regime and suppression of the democratic opposition the following months brought us a hybrid operation a migrant crisis on Poland's eastern border orchestrated by Minsk with kremlin's support it was a Prelude to an unprovoked attack on Ukraine this Russian war against Ukraine has revealed the true face of Putin's regime the atrocities and brutality against Ukrainian civilian population an attempt to erase the whole nation an economic energy and food crisis emerging all over the world as a consequence of Russian actions the ukrainians have bravely resisted Russian assaults I'm proud that Paul's and other nations have offered the Ukrainian people a strong support because of free and Democratic world is not a theoretical concept but a real community of values ladies and gentlemen Poland's leading role in response to Russia's Invasion has been unprecedented we have been at the Forefront of calls for sending Aid including the military one to Ukraine to help fight of the Russian aggressor and to impose severe sanctions on Russia since the invasion began Poland has welcomed more Ukrainian refugees than any other European country not in refugee camps but in our homes today Poland is home to more than 3.5 million ukrainians or ecd data showed that last year Poland spent over 9 billion dollars 1.5 percent of its GDP on humanitarian aid for Ukraine we also act as a logistic hub for Aid transfers from other countries Poland pledges to continue its support for Ukraine in order to stop Russian new imperialism we'll also continue our support to democratic Belarus Ukraine has never been and will never be alone in its fight because ukrainians are fighting for all of us unless stopped Russia is ready to go much further thank you|||To be continued... Right now Wojciech Lepczyński https://lepczynski.it/en hello, hello, is 6:00 AM and today I going to conference I going to AWS COMMUNITY DAY in Wasaw but first I need catch my train I like to travel by train because I have few
extra hours for myself and I can for example writ a new blog article
or edit my video I arrived one day early one day before AWS
commuted why because I want rest and see the city good morning let's go to conferences but first
coffee Why is worth going to conference? I'm also curious why these all people came
here I'm going to go ask a few people and we'll
find out. lots of people come to learn new things and
learn about practical things about real life case study. if you think you need to know something about
the cloud before going to the conference you are totally wrong there are a lot of people here who are just
starting to learn about the cloud and don't know much about it in my opinion it's a great place to learn in my opinion is a great place to learn in my opinion is a great place to learn wait, wait, wait, it's not over I have some swags stickers yeah I just love it wait wait it's not over as I said it's a great
place to learn but people are here not only from that reason for example I like meeting other people and
talking face to face you know exchange experience you get to know
their point of view everyone has different experience that's why
it's so important we are actually a group of people with similar
passion we like new technology and we like of course
Cloud so we will always have something to talk about hey are you still there whoa thanks for your
time and see you in next video now it's 6 a.m and today I'm going to conference there are a lot of people who work for example edit my my... edit my video thanks for your time and see you in next video|||Making sure students and staff continue to stay safe. Poland Local Schools held safety drills today. Around 25 first responders... including members of the F-B-I attended. There was a lockdown and this morning. Students and staff practiced hiding and evacuating... once the building was secured. As a winter precaution... today's evacuation route is one that will be used during inclement weather. Poland local schools superintendent CRAIG HOCKENBERRY says... the district wants to be prepared for any situation. CRAIG HOCKENBERRY, POLAND LOCAL SCHOOLS SUPERINTENDENT: "WE NEVER KNOW WHEN, HOW OR WHAT THE SITUATION IS GOING TO LOOK LIKE, SO WE ARE AT A COMPLETE DISADVANTAGE. SO, DRILLING GIVES US A LITTLE BIT OF A HIGH GROUND AS WE MOVE GET BETTER." Hockenberry says they're using what they learned today... to plan more drills. McKinley Elementary and Poland Middle School held routine|||well now to the election in Poland the votes 
are in we now know the results so will Poland   dramatically change are we going to see a major 
shift perhaps a huge move away from NATO support   a dramatic change in Poland or more of the same 
Mike Kupa is journalist in Warsaw Poland fantastic   friend of the show we're glad to have Mike back 
he's the host of VM TV there in Poland uh Mike   so any big surprises for you or sort of more of 
the same from what we saw can you walk us through   what EX ly happened well uh hello Clayton hello 
everyone once again it wasn't a surprise for me   I was uh I predicted from some time now that uh 
you know Law And Justice uh the ruling party thus   far would win the elections but they wouldn't 
get a majority so the the fundamental question   everybody was asking uh even you know last 
week was who with whom uh Law And Justice is   going to have to form a coalition now most of the 
observers and analysts were saying that they would   most likely form a coalition with the party that 
is to the right of them that is a confederation   party I spoke about it a few times on your show 
however it turns out that uh while expectations   were very high for confederation some were even 
estimating back in the spring that they would get   about 15% of the vote it turns out they got just 
over 7% of the vote which gives them about uh 18   MPS right now in the current Parliament instead of 
the projected originally uh you know 50 to 60 MPS   so that's a big blow to Confederation in order to 
have a majority in the Polish Parliament you have   have to have 231 MPS peace does not have Law And 
Justice does not have that on its own so what's   going to happen now is the three next parties 
which are the three main opposition parties   which is the Civic platform led by uh Donald 
Tusk uh then we have the so-called Third Way   which is basically an or a sort of conglomerate 
of these uh liberal lights uh and uh the so-called   peasant party so basically a party of uh farmers 
and the hard left the woke left party which is   called the left party basically in Poland they 
will most likely be forming a coalition and they   will most likely be governing with Tusk as head of 
government as prime minister so no big surprises   for me the only I guess surprise for me was I 
actually did expect Confederation to come out   slightly higher I thought they would get about 9% 
of the vote they got just over seven as I said so   uh yeah that's that's a loss for uh for Law and 
Justice it's a loss for confederation generally   for the rightwing in Poland and we are expected 
to have a left liberal uh very Pro woke and very   pro-eu uh Coalition coming up were you surprised 
by that I mean it seemed there was enormous it   seemed like there from the outside maybe there was 
enormous push back from sort of woke politics this   alignment with the European Union on a number 
of different issues the the alignment with NATO   of course the war in Ukraine this is seems Seems 
striking here the problem with the new Coalition   is that uh they are just as Pro Pro Ukraine and 
pro- Nat as Law And Justice except Law And Justice   was a little bit too fanatical so the current 
Coalition will be slightly less fanatical but   in terms of the general course of the sort of 
atlanticist Institutions NATO and the European   Union they're going to tow the line except the 
only thing that might change is they're not going   to be asking you know for a fight with Russia 
maybe as much as Law And Justice did as a matter   of fact just before we came on I was actually 
looking at uh the government record from the   previous prime minister ship Donald Tusk which 
is in the Years 2007 but 2015 and uh Tusk uh on   many occasions actually articulated a rational 
policy towards Russia at least not a policy of   let's be the first ones let's not be the tip of 
the spear in fighting Russia which peace which   the law and Justice government obviously was not 
they were asking for a fight basically and the   only reason why in the last couple of weeks they 
changed their tune regarding Ukraine especially   when it comes to the import of Ukrainian grain 
and issues pertaining to Ukrainian immigrants   was because they saw that Confederation which 
is the party to the right of them was actually   gaining on this issue talking about the refugee 
flow and talking about you know sending all our   military equipment to Ukraine and losing the 
war in essence so uh there was a lot of people   that were fed up obviously the turnout which is 
interesting was over 70% so that's a record after   1989 for Poland uh but I think a lot of people 
were just fed up with uh two terms of the law   and Justice government because at some point uh 
they really became uh you know uh enamored with   power and they just didn't care what anybody said 
about them they thought they were really going to   govern for a third term and that just made them 
very arrogant and a lot of people maybe didn't   look so much at the policy specifics as just get 
them get them the hell out of there and we want to   see new faces in in government and I think a lot 
of it was based basically on emotion and not on   sound rational policy analysis what do you think 
this means for the Ukrainian refugees in Poland   any change there on that policy because what is 
the current number too we had over close to 3   million Ukrainian refugees that were were staying 
there the ones that came here and are still here   after the ones that came after February 24th 2022 
it's estimated about 2 million so if you take that   2 million plus the 2 million around that were 
already here before the War uh that's going to   create about 4 million I think with the amount 
of the ones that aren't declared the ones that   are here illegally are probably going closer to 
about 5 million so I don't think their status quo   will change sadly I think what's going to happen 
right now is we're going to be seeing this policy   push for larger Multicultural multiculturalism in 
Poland and I wouldn't be surprised if in light of   this you know within a decade's time we're going 
to have a Ukrainian minority party in the Polish   Parliament and that's when you're going to know 
that things are really gone uh down the train   for Poland um but uh it's interesting because you 
know peace the lusti Called Peace in Poland they   were officially conservative even though they 
had the most liberal uh Pol immigration policy   in all of the EU during their time more non-eu 
people came into the EU to Poland specifically   than in any other European country and I'm talking 
about obviously legal immigrants so despite the   rhetoric the borders were open uh the current uh 
the forming Coalition is not going to change that   sadly um but I think that will only strengthen the 
opposition uh sort of on the streets and possibly   give new motivation for anti-immigration parties 
somewhat like the Confederation to make new gains   in next year's local elections and the elections 
to the European Union which are scheduled for June   last year we saw polish citizens lined up with 
their cars getting coal from power plants that   were not even set up to really hand out coal to 
individual citizens like taking your hatch back   and just filling up the trunk with chunks of coal 
to try to drive home with we now know of course   what's happening in the Middle East and of course 
the push towards clean energy in Poland this is   is a big push in on the part of uh on the part 
of Poland you know we could see an energy crisis   uh facing facing Europe and facing Poland this 
uh into this winter given what's happened with   the Middle East so where do the Polish people 
sit right now on energy supplies fossil fuels   um can you talk a little bit about what you guys 
expect to see there as we head into the colder   months the problem with the Coalition that's 
coming in right now is they're even more green   than the other party that just lost the election 
now whereas Law And Justice they pretended to be   very you know anti-woke you know in the climate 
agenda and so on and so on but in terms of signing   all the relevant documents in the European Union 
uh pertaining to fighting emissions and all that   stuff they signed everything but then they rort 
they came back and said you know the European   Union forced us well the Coalition that's coming 
in right now they're not going to say that because   they're going to willingly sign up to everything 
of the climate agenda that the EU pushes so you   know electric cars and all that stuff and phasing 
out of coal so uh it's obviously not going to   happen from day to day and it'll be there will be 
a lot of push back but if basically the government   that's coming in right now is about as crazy on 
the climate change issue as the greens in Germany   especially the left party which is be forming 
most likely this Coalition so I think they're   gonna that turned out really well for Germany by 
the way yeah of course um but you know as as I   said uh I'm pretty sure that'll generate a lot 
of push back and I think Tusk is even you know   uh enough of a realist to know that yeah even if 
you implement these globalist policies you have to   implement them in phases and incrementally whereas 
the left is probably going to be pushing very much   to implement them quickly that way you can't you 
know reverse anything once they lose power which   they surely will as I said we talked about this 
before we went on I think including the climate   agenda and the agenda in foreign policy and the 
woke agenda that they will surely try to impose   on polish Society in the upcoming years and months 
uh I don't think this Coalition is going to last   too long I think there's too many differences and 
too many personal differences between them uh so   I'm giving them about 18 months you heard it here 
for the first time before this Coalition collaps   and we're probably going to have early elections 
in Poland uh but one way or another giv 18 months   all right we'll hold you to that we'll keep a 
little countdown time 18 months before you're   going to have a civil war in the Coalition because 
despite the fact that uh they're they're mainly   aligned on a lot of issues pertaining to social 
policy and foreign policy but because there's so   much of the cake to give Iran right now once 
you threw out the old Elite uh that's going   to generate a lot of conflict so who's going to go 
into you know state-owned companies who's going to   go into state owned television who's going to take 
over the Ministries you know once you're dividing   a good cake everybody wants the bigger piece so 
I think that in essence and not so much policy   issues is going to be generating the conflicts 
that eventually are going to lead to the you know   uh collapse of the Coalition I'll get you out of 
here on this mic over the past few days since the   outbreak of war in Israel we've against the 17 
factions there uh in in in in on the Palestinian   side you know everyone wants to paint this just 
as Hamas but it's very important to point out this   basically 17 different factions there there's been 
a lot of memes go around on the internet about   Poland as you see London you see all of these 
protests you see France uh there's been a lot of   memes floating around about Poland how you don't 
see this in Poland can you talk can you talk about   that can you address why you would have 2 million 
Ukrainian refugees but you don't see the type of   perhaps protest and crisis that you're seeing in 
London and and France and other EU countries right   now well I've seen the memes on Twitter I've seen 
the ones you know oh look and this is Poland no   Hamas demonstrations no Palestine organizations no 
Pro Palestine uh demonstrations well first of all   there was a pro Palestine demonstration in krou 
it wasn't as large as the one in London and in   other countries and it wasn't so maybe Muslim UPF 
front but it did take place they had guys walking   around you know with the Arafat colors and the 
Palestinian flag so there was a demonstration   in KRA of which all those you know Outlets didn't 
report on and the second thing is you know okay   we might not have a Muslim problem in Poland 
but we sure as hell have a Ukrainian problem   in Poland and the same places that are shown in 
kov right now lacking in Muslim demonstrations   or po Palestine demonstrations you know almost 
every single day since La last year there was a   permanent Ukrainian president beside the uh statue 
of Adam mitk in KRA of square now Adam mkich is   obviously a famous polish poet and playright 
and beside his statue you basically have this   Gathering of ukrainians standing with flags you 
know screaming support AZ of support Ukraine and   that was basically on a permanent basis so after a 
while a couple of Polish people got angry Patriots   started protesting against his football Hooligans 
and so on and so on so I don't know if it's still   there but the ukrainians are the ones protesting 
in Poland and making their uh presence known so   you know when I saw the meme for the first time 
they say oh look no Hamas demonstrations in Poland   I'm like yeah but you have as of demonstrations in 
Poland which pretty much to me amounts to the same   thing so I don't care uh the best thing would be 
to do not to have one or the other right um so I   think it's basically a meane to sort of you know 
it was I I I called you know I called Jack bobas   out on this on Twitter I said Jack stop shoing for 
peace you know for the law and Justice government   I mean they're just as pro-immigrant and Pro open 
borders just to the east not to the South because   bringing in Muslims on a huge you know number 
basis like the ukrainians will still look bad   in the media right now in Poland it might change 
with time but ukrainians hey what the hell at   least they're white right and they speak a similar 
language but they're as detrimental to our culture   if not more uh and to our economy as the masses 
that would come from the south so you know it's   just as I said it was just poor Shilling for 
the ruling party and I understand where they're   coming from a lot of these people well thank 
you for shining a light on this and telling us   the truth here you know it's very easy for these 
memes to travel on the internet very quick and   Jack wants to tweet that kind of stuff and it 
makes it seems like that's the truth but thank   you for sharing the actual truth with us here 
on the show uh Mike Ruba thank you so much for   joining us I know it's been a busy few days with 
the election there we appreciate you bringing uh   your insights on what what this what this means 
for the government going forward and you heard   it here the Polish government 18 months 18 months 
that's it that's all they've got left uh we'll see   a new government I guess in 18 months Mike great 
to see you thank you so much thank you guys have   a good one God willing God speed thank you so much 
for watching this segment here at redacted we are   live every day at 400 p.m. eastern time trying 
to share the stories that the mainstream media   will not cover you should also come over and 
join our community of redacted rebels over at|||We will travel on the high-speed Pendolino train of the Polish Railways. Departure from Cracow Main 06:01
Arrival to Warsaw Central 08:19 Ticket price 181,30 (zl) about 38€ (first class) Classical music is playing, it really puts you in a good mood right from the morning. My place no. 71 at the window. Food can be ordered. Two drinks and a snack are free. I ordered water and coffee. They give candy with coffee. The name Pendolino is used to identify a family of high-speed, tilting-technology trains, produced in Italy.  These trains owe their name (pendolino can mean 'small pendulum' in Italian) to the mechanism enabling them to tilt when going round a curve. Unquestionable comfort. 2014, Polish State Railways started passenger service trains PKP Pendolino ED250 operating 200 km/h   High-speed tests were carried out with the new train in Poland. Pendolino reached 293 km/h. This is a new record for Polish railways. Tickets for the earliest train journey were at the lowest price. Let's see what the WC is like in this train. I like the colors of the toilet. 200 km/h speed. These trains are not reaching their potential. We arrive at the Warsaw Central Station. This is my stop. The train will continue to Gdynia. We arrived on schedule. A massive thanks to my Patrons and Channel Members. List in description. Link to Patreon: in description.
Join on Patreon for as little as €1 per month! Thank you for watching to the end. See you next time soon.|||good day peoples say here from Ustronie Morskie 
after a week on the northwestern Polish coast   which had some really nice days out here and today 
we're gonna head out we're gonna keep following   the coast east in direction of the great city of 
Gdansk also known on the German tongue as Danzig i'm getting seasick there folks it was a great 
pleasure to welcome you at my place for you   a small souvenir from your stay with us i wish 
you a safe journey i cordially invite you again let's see yeah yeah we're gonna you got 
this we gotta figure out a place yeah okay she always closes i'm gonna get back on the road 
again see if we still got it in us probably it's like riding a bike this whole thing 
about 200 kilometers to get to Danzig today oh boy   i'm stretching my legs to back up with the loaded 
bike and i still got leg day in my legs oh lordy gotta love the hammies you wanna i wanna 
keep going you're down further east yeah   or you got to go home or something you 
got to get you a sign that says Arnhem you can hitchhike or you want to keep 
going east okay yeah sweet as let's go till next time so let's go to Gdansk good evening good now here we're both surrounded on both sides by 
the ocean there the dunes and here by the lake let me just go in here get some bread so fresh got him oh no you got the skyr i got Polish gouda 
too and i got Berlinky you know how much protein   is in these quarter to one brekkie great backing 
up skills being demonstrated here zero hecks given look at it i find it amazing how even the smallest 
of towns tend to have what looks kind of   like these old soviet block looking 
apartments even like the smallest   village has like a two three 
story apartment building see there i think you noticed something it's the donkey and Shrek yeah in Poland so far uh   copyright is more of a like a concept than 
really something of a reality i've seen   mickey mouse placed in front of vacation 
parks do you want a picture of a donkey get in the middle look at you you want to sit on the donkey yes you do you should do yeah i think you got you you're pretty tipsy just 
by uh inhaling the aroma of this man he was   having a good afternoon buzz so did you like 
our little stop over in Lazuroa making friends well since you've made new friends i see you bye that was lLazuroa folks come visit they got 
Shrek donkey and the friendly alcoholic man let's fuel up in between uh the crops 
the flowers what are the flowers again yeah that i've seen in the supermarket 
already yeah you feeling your legs yes leg day   swats lunges yes they were a success hey change 
of plans well actually your involvement what's   tremendous in here Mariska noticed a place 
at the end of the peninsula as a place called   Hel you can't see it here right now this very 
narrow peninsula and i think at one point you   could probably see the ocean on both the sea 
on both sides let's go to Hel let's go to Hel   all right let's go to Hel we're 
in the more narrow part of the   Hel peninsula and over there is Gdansk the 
other side is the open Baltic sea one of   the narrowest parts of the peninsula a little 
harbor here a little marina it's like Polish and of course a cross nice cross here cool as and so we arrive and ride into Hel 
it's Dutch spelling for hell but it's still Hel   it's a nice forest here towards the 
end of the peninsula it kept this   nice and wild here that's cool old pine forest 
with the dunes that way oh train no train look at the bench it's almost i haven't seen   stuff like that since New Zealand this is 
the open Baltic seaside nice there she goes yeah clear as you don't have that in the North Sea see if you can find it on some of that sweet 
amber it's good again in the sun eh it was it   it was a bit fresh oh it says i was 
chilly from sitting riding life look   at that beautiful Baltic water man jeez 
found a place to stay tonight in the dunes here we go we got the keys room reveal honey i'm home we'll be all chuffed with 
our tea here tomorrow in the sunshine for all the Dutch people no 
we're not going to eat here   but uh we were figuring uh can can 
you arrest a restaurant on this thank you need no we're going for the kebabs   it really is good yeah yeah 
he's like any better than this but we got the beach here come with to Hel beach Hel yeah well 
uh someone mentioned Gdansk or Danzig   today i don't know what happened 
to that but instead we got you   all here in Hel tomorrow we'll 
move on to our final destination got him well people's from Hel and back   this is it i'll see you in the next one when we're 
over there in Gdansk thanks for watching ciao|||Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin met virtually with Ukraine defense contact group. During his opening remarks, Austin spoke about his recent trip to Ukraine and Poland. He's praised Ukrainian troops saying it was moving to see the resilience of the Ukrainian people. Ukraine has regained 50% of the territory loss since February 2022 and it was moving to see once again firsthand, the resilience of the Ukrainian people who stand firm in the face of continued attacks. Secretary Austin says Ukraine needs more global support as they continue to fight against Russia.|||High Gate in Darłowo Pomeranian Dukes' Castle in Darłowo Market Square in Darłowo The Fisherman's Fountain City Hall in Darłowo Monument to Stanisław Dulewicz Wieprza River Leopold Tyrmand's bench Roman Catholic parish pw. Our Lady of Częstochowa The road to Darłówek Terminal in Darłowo|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||we are Lynne and Mariusz and we welcome you 
to join us on our journey when we renovate   an over a 100 year old farmhouse in 
poland and we fetch the land back into   use we gave up everything in the UK, jumped 
in the car with bonnie and woody the cats it's hard work but we're enjoying it everything 
from knocking down the old walls and the plaster   to put a new plasterboards up and finishing 
it's been a pretty hard year so far with minimal   heating we've had to upgrade a lot of electrics 
ourselves and we've had some major dumb problems   but on a positive we know our vintor sewage i 
thought i'd never be so happy to say that we're   also upgrading a small cottage on the land as well 
because we want to become as self-sufficient as   we possibly can do with the help of our 
solar panels and growing our own fruits and of course our veg and we've been trying 
lots of new experiments from no-till no dig and getting ready next year with 
some raised beds made from pallets but come join us and see some 
of the fruits of our labor   it's been a hard year so 
far but we're still smiling   i'm wise we've had a lot of 
success with the veg growing so far   we've also ventured into incubating 
and hatching our own eggs we started a chick project some months ago and 
we're more than happy with the results so far and   of course the chickens helped to do that with us 
as well they give us the eggs in the first place   we've also got some runner decks i think they're 
the most funniest animals i've ever come across   in my life such personalities and of course we've 
had some fun getting the chickens out of the tree   and we also have some new 
zealand red breeding rabbits they help us to become as self-reliant 
and self-sufficient as possible   and we've had some good success 
although they do most of the work and we've had quite a few highs in this summer   taking some time out to go mushroom hunting 
in a local polish forest but we've had some   lows as well and a few dramas along the 
way but now we're on to planning for 2022 and what a year that's going to be we 
have some major plans for our small farm   everything from goats and expanding the chicken 
index to really doubling down on vegetable growing   and looking at some other options as 
well who knows maybe pigs so come join us   we're Lynne and Mariusz and join us on our journey|||so what do you say in Poland when someone is kind in Poland we say and when someone is unkind this is that makes sense all right and what do you say when someone is spoiled in Poland we don't say spoiled nope we say|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||In the heart of Europe, where industrial 
giants have reigned supreme for decades,   a seismic shift is underway. Poland, 
once in the shadow of Germany,   is now emerging as a direct threat to the 
throne of Germany's industrial supremacy. Today, we unveil a story of ambition, 
innovation, and economic prowess as   Poland challenges the status quo and sets its 
sights on the peak of industrial greatness. Before we dive into the heart of this development,   make sure to like this video and 
subscribe to Tech Revolution. Now, let’s get this video rolling. German fall? The federal statistics office recently 
reported a dip in German industrial   output, marking the fourth consecutive 
month of decline. This ongoing trend has   sparked concerns regarding a looming recession. The 0.2% decrease in industrial 
production in August surpassed   the predicted 0.1% decline set 
by analysts consulted by Reuters. Franziska Palmas, a senior Europe economist at 
Capital Economics, mentioned that this decline in   August was influenced by volatile elements, making 
it less concerning than initially perceived. However, she remains wary and expects 
the downturn in industrial output to   continue due to high-interest 
rates and a demand reduction. "We foresee a contraction in German GDP 
for both the upcoming third and fourth   quarters," Palmas commented. Two consecutive 
GDP contractions define a technical recession. The statistics office adjusted its July data, 
indicating a 0.6% month-on-month decrease in   production compared to the initially reported 
0.8%. In a broader perspective, data revealed   a 1.9% drop in production from June to August 
2023 when compared to the three months prior. Several sectors influenced August's overall 
performance. There was a 2.4% decline in   construction, a 6.6% drop in energy, and a 2.3% 
decrease in machinery and equipment manufacturing. In contrast, a silver lining appeared in 
the automotive industry, which demonstrated   a 7.6% growth. When excluding the 
energy and construction sectors,   the industry's production in August 
saw a 0.5% rise compared to July. Industrial orders showed an 
increase of 3.9% in August,   primarily driven by the computing, 
electronic, and optical products sector. Yet, Destatis highlighted the ongoing 
uncertainty in the industry's overall outlook. Commenting on this trend, ING's global 
head of macro, Carsten Brzeski, said,   "Despite the uptick, thin order 
books and significant inventories   hint at a continued stagnation 
of German industrial production." Germany's manufacturing sector,   which constitutes roughly a fifth of its 
economy, continues to face challenges. The HCOB final Purchasing Managers' Index for 
manufacturing landed at 39.6 for September,   well below the pivotal 50-point mark 
differentiating growth from contraction. Brzeski further added, "Retail sales, exports, and 
industrial production showed disappointing results   in the early phase of the third quarter, implying 
a significant risk of economic contraction. Poland in After the concerning trends in 
German industrial output and   the looming recession fears, 
another story unfolds nearby. Germany's challenges with 
idle factories last year,   primarily due to the spike in gas prices and 
the repercussions of the Ukraine conflict,   have provoked deeper contemplation 
on potential deindustrialization. While Germany grapples with concerns 
about its competitive edge, Poland,   often termed Europe’s rising star, showcases 
its burgeoning manufacturing prowess. Over the past ten years, Poland has exhibited an   impressive 85% surge in output per 
individual, amounting to $43,113,   as stated by the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development. In comparison, Germany's rise is at 46%, 
with an average EU growth of 55% in the   same duration. The data reveals more: 
a decade ago, Germany's manufacturing   industry constituted 20.3% of its economic 
yield, which has now reduced to 18.5% by 2022. Poland, on the flip side, has bolstered its 
factory output from 16.7% of its GDP to 17.7%.   Remarkably, this output has jumped from $101bn 
in 2019 to a whopping $122bn just last year. Tomas Dvorak, a senior economist at Oxford 
Economics, comments on this phenomenon,   “Poland has witnessed a comprehensive 
success story over the recent years.   It's not just about the industrial sector; the 
entire economy has made commendable strides." He further adds that Poland might stand alone, 
not just in Europe but potentially globally,   in surpassing its industrial production to 
pre-pandemic figures. "The last trio of years,   marked by challenges like Covid and 
energy crises, hasn't caused any   significant damage to the Polish industrial 
sector. This resilience is indeed notable." The reasons behind Poland's 
robust industrial performance   still perplex many economists, Dvorak admits. Several attribute this growth to favorable 
government policies, while intrinsic   factors like reduced wages and affordable land 
availability remain significant contributors. Moreover, fortuitous timing 
seems to have also played   its part in Poland's economic success story. Polands incredible growth About this, a noticeable "near-shoring" trend   is on the rise. Western corporations 
are recalibrating their supply chains,   shifting them from distant locations 
such as China to closer shores. Historically, industry has been deeply integrated 
into Poland's journey to growth since the nation   shrugged off the chains of communism. 
When the curtain fell on the Soviet Union,   Poland emerged with an expansive and 
somewhat dated industrial foundation. Yet, the nation's proficient, technically 
trained workforce made it a prime hub for   diverse industries, particularly given the 
added allure of relatively reduced wages. Data from the German Federal Statistical Office 
in 2021 reflected this disparity, with the   average hourly wage in Polish manufacturing at 
$12.33 compared to Germany's substantial $49.56. For years, Poland played the role of a 
junior partner in Germany's industrial   realm. Being an integral part of 
Germany's automotive supply chain,   Poland has been producing essential 
components like engines, tires, and car seats. Despite this, automotive production 
today constitutes approximately   one-tenth of Poland's total manufacturing output. However, the vision from Warsaw seeks to 
shift gears. Polish leaders aspire for the   nation to begin producing higher-value items and   have initiated measures to draw foreign 
investment in avant-garde technologies. Noteworthy advancements in this direction include   Intel's announcement of a $4.6 
billion factory near Wrocław. Simultaneously, Warsaw has been proactive 
in courting investments from the Taiwan   Semiconductor Manufacturing Company, aiming to 
mitigate geopolitical risks linked to China. Moreover, Poland has surged ahead in securing 
investments for battery "gigafactories",   crucial for the electric vehicle industry. I In 2022, Poland outstripped the 
US in battery manufacturing,   with its output surpassing Germany's 
by more than double. However,   both European nations trail behind 
China's colossal battery output. A cornerstone of Poland's industrial 
ascent is its ambitious infrastructure   expansion. Between 2011 and 2021, Poland 
constructed 429 miles of motorways,   surpassing Germany's 193 miles, though Poland's 
starting base was considerably smaller. Yet, as Poland's momentum rises, 
Germany faces its set of challenges.   With the cessation of affordable 
Russian gas, elevated electricity,   and gas costs are concerning entities 
like the German Industry Federation. German Chancellor Olaf Scholz 
recognizes the profound issues,   extending beyond mere gas pricing. He's 
championed the transformation of Germany   into a renewable energy titan, eyeing 
an 80% shift to green energy by 2030. Nonetheless, experts have raised eyebrows at 
Berlin's policies, particularly their nuclear   energy stance. Even as Germany races to 
augment clean electricity generation,   its remaining nuclear power plants 
have been prematurely shut down. In contrast, Poland, feeling the 
geopolitical pressure due to its   proximity to Russia and Ukraine, 
is charting a different course. With coal powering around 70% of its electricity,   Poland is aggressively venturing into 
renewables, including inaugurating   its nuclear power era. Recent developments 
include signing a contract with US heavyweight Westinghouse to construct an AP1000 reactor, 
set to be operational by 2033. This initiative,   along with others like small modular reactors,   is backed by giants such as Rolls-Royce 
and GE Hitachi Nuclear Energy. Mark Nelson from Radiant Energy views Poland's 
nuclear strategy as a boon for industries,   offering them a consistent, 
dependable power source. This energy stability can be a significant 
attraction for foreign investors,   especially when juxtaposed against 
Germany's fluctuating energy landscape. Nelson said, "With nuclear energy, there's 
a promise of consistent, ultra-affordable,   clean electricity. For industrial entities,   this assurance paves the way 
for considerable investments." Looking forward both countries Pivoting our focus back to Germany, the 
nation's reservations regarding nuclear   power have become increasingly evident in 
recent diplomatic maneuvers. Germany has   actively lobbied against France's ambitious 
plans to reform EU electricity markets. The proposal from Paris aims to 
commercialize nuclear power at   rates that mirror production costs, a 
move Germany isn't keen on embracing. Berlin's abrupt decision to decommission 
its nuclear power plants had repercussions.   The nation found itself compelled to 
reignite coal-driven power stations,   anticipating the energy 
demands of the upcoming winter. As it stands, Germany's prowess in the 
European Union's industrial sector is   unmatched, contributing to an impressive 26% of   the EU's manufacturing output. 
Poland trails with a 6% share. However, this landscape isn't static. 
The gap between Germany and Poland's   industrial outputs is gradually diminishing. Dvorak from Oxford Economics articulates 
the challenge and the path ahead for   Poland. He observes, "As nations 
prosper, their wage bills surge,   affecting their competitive edge. 
The inevitable trajectory for   Poland is to ascend the value chain to 
safeguard its manufacturing foothold." This evolving dynamic casts a shadow of 
uncertainty for leaders like Scholz in   Germany. The strategic distance between 
Berlin and Warsaw, in industrial terms,   seems to be contracting faster than anticipated. That’s all for today. We've 
navigated the ever-changing   industrial landscapes of Germany and Poland. As Europe's power dynamics shift, questions arise: 
Will Poland's rise influence other EU countries?   How will Germany's energy policies impact its 
long-term industrial competitiveness? And,   crucially, what do these changes mean 
for the future of European industry? If you've found value in the video, please give 
us a thumbs up and subscribe to Tech Revolution. Thank you for watching and see on our next video!|||Poland country located in Central Europe with territory 312 679 square kilometers as estimated in 2014 population of Poland is a bit over 38 million people its capital and the biggest city is fascia with 1.7 million people var shop within a greater metropolitan area has 3.1 million residents which makes Russia the ninth most populous capital on the European Union today Vashem is considered as a major international tourist destination and significant cultural political and economic hub let's get back to the poland poland is thirty fourth most populous country in the world an eighth most populous country in europe it has an amazing and rich history that i can't cover all in this video but i'll give you a quick insight the establishment of Polish state can be traced back to 966 with mesh coffers of Poland converted country to Christianity the kingdom of Poland was founded in 1511 association with the Grand Duchy of Lithuania this is also in my opinion one of the most interesting periods in the Polish history union between Poland and is the way near Forum polish-lithuanian Commonwealth one of the largest most populous in powerful countries of the 16th and 17th century in Europe Poland also contributed a lot in the fight against the Ottomans and Muslim conquest of Europe after the collapse of Polish Lithuanian corner Poland lost territory to Russia Russian Empire Austria until the end of the World War one in 1918 when Poland regained its independence and the second polish Republic after that follow the second world war that cost more than six million polish lives after the war of Communists of the government was formed it was overthrown in the revolutions of 1989 when Poland adopted a new constitution establishing itself as a democracy despite the large number of casualties and destruction the country experienced during the World War two the country managed to preserve much of its culture well now that we bought the idea for history let's take a look at some incredible site please forgive my pronunciation this is incredibly hard for me malbork castle the Krakow olds down bobbled castle ouch with speaker Masurian Lakes cabron national product Slovene ski national park valishia salt mine yeah la vieja forest broad sloth be assured mountains now that we've covered that let's check out some traditional polish food so as you can see a large sausages Bialik cube lhasa Habanos reais kaku basa flaky and of course PA Oggy now let's hear an example of Polish language vice-president service scallops approve my grits in exchange she oughtta do tika dish so essentially to advise see a biscuit Oh this video came to an end today is 11 November and I'd like to wish happy national Independence Day to all poles watching this video I can also say my friends are being in a Poland at the moment waving with our national flag supporting Polish independence I hope you guys enjoy watching this video if you did please make sure you like the video subscribe and check my new Facebook page|||Ciao Dzień dobry! welcome back to my Eurovision react review
channel. So this video is delayed not out of trees
so I was waiting for all of the 10 songs to be released for to bear said say arrow pay
Yeah, which is the name of the Polish national final which is taking place this week and
where the winner will represent Poland at Eurovision so I was waiting I was waiting
I was waiting until I saw today that Alesia, Poland's representative at 2020 Eurovision
which never took place. Her song isn't dropping until midnight tomorrow
night. Well, that's no good for me. Because on Friday, I'm flying to India. And as a result of that, I just can't wait
that long. So elites hear I hope your song is great. But fundamentally, I'm not going to be able
to listen to that until basically Sunday, which is when the national finals taking place. So nine songs have now been released. Apologies for my dishwasher. If that's in the background. I'm really sorry. That is annoying, but there's nothing I can
do about it. I'm trying to multitask. I'm trying to pack for India. I'm trying to wash my dishes. I'm trying to do this video. And it's just the way it is. My Polish national flag proud industrial flag
by Polish flag is behind me in solidarity with what I hope is a strong national final,
if you're new here. Whilst obviously my Polish pronounciation
and my Polish in general is bad. And to some extent non existent. I am part Polish hence my invested interest
in Poland selection for their song for Eurovision 2023. So with that said, the nine songs what I'm
gonna do is I'm gonna check them out. I'm going to do my usual kind of rank them
out of 10. Again, there's no kind of if you've watched
my channel before, there's no kind of rubric that I use to work that one out. But nonetheless, by doing that, it allows
me to rank them at the end. So I can't necessarily say my 10 to one because
I guess it's nine to one, but nonetheless, let's just check them out. Let's see what Poland's gods are for this
year. Okay, so number one, Natasha please don't plagiarism me. So I for my benchmark of female bop numbers, I'm
gonna compare compare this to paranoia from last year right, Daria. This isn't as good as that hear the chorus for a second time. Makes me like the chorus a little bit more. It's nothing special. And I think because arcmin set the bar so
high last year. I think Poland needs to meet that or deliver
something even better. And this isn't better than river or equally the same. So a bad little pop song. doesn't really go anywhere. Okay, and Natasha writes, okay, so for Natasha, live do up 6.9 to 10 Not a bad start a solid start a
safe start, right? Kuba Kuba is back I'm assuming it's the same
cool bar let's see if the song is better than last year. So his song last year got selected for OJ
second chance right. wasn't a bad number. I liked the duet that he has done with Psara. So let's check out you do me. Okay. This has potential a bit more. cheesier then is offering from last year somewhat sugary, which isn't necessarily a bad thing. It's catchy. It's all right. Catch here then Natasha is I mean, it's no groundbreaking. It's very kind of safe. I kind of assumed Kuba would come back with
something a bit more of an impact. Because I know he really wants to do it. I've seen him in an interview where he's made
that very Claire hates his dream, but it's better than
Natasha. It's a catchy hoorah. We're treated to kind of two choruses pre
chorus of a post chorus the on my way of three courses three part
course we know the dude can perform I particularly remember that last year stage presence and
choreography was on point do you actually like it? Let's go more positive for this one. Good Bob. I'm gonna give you a 7.9 So I think one on
my left them 7.9 Okay, all right. So number three. Okay. Lena Lena booty now, because of the lyrics, I can't not compare
this to Meghan Trainor write all about that bass. Which is a far more superior song from the
40 seconds I'm listening from moody. Our Lena. Not too short. This one. I'm getting the vibe the production is not
going to shake up. So we're going to get the same beat and the
same tempo. So you just got to go for three minutes. And you either like it the first body socket,
seconds seconds, or you get a taxi annually. I'm not a huge fan of these kinds of mid tempo
beats that don't shake up their tempo. Learning what real men want. Thank you Elena. They weren't booed at all right. I don't know if you know this, but that man
is all about the booty. Okay, Elena. Yeah, Elena. I'm not convinced I want to get that taxi
I want to be out of here. I'm not as good as Natasha is. Let's go in at a six only because I remember
the song. Booty booty Booty booty Booty but I've added
so many booties on that self bet. Yeah, not a fan six next K Dominic please
be better than a Lena. high potential already all right. I think this is my favorite so far. In regards to my personal taste, I really
like that. That tempo it sounds a bit like Amy MacDonald
and Mr. Rock and roll them in stone rock I like this it's my favorite so far. This is the most authentic songs so far. Right Do you know what Dominic? Thank God for that because I was getting a
little bit nervous. Chris were on the song before. And I was like I'm a Polsky pry. I feel awkward river would mean that Poland
would turn around and be like we couldn't do this. Because the first three songs weren't completely
that strong. That's a decent effort. That's a decent effort. I'm gonna give that an 8.2 I quite like that
one is a good one. Got the melody in my head. Always a good sign. Okay, so let's see. I think she's released a snippet as you can
see there tick tock snippet. I can't judge this I'm gonna slip it back
at least work out the sort of song that it is the vibe that it is our ballad that gave me nothing. Let's see. I can't comment on that whatsoever. Other than it's a ballad. Good luck on Sunday. But ultimately, as I said, Sunday's gonna
be the first time I listen to that song as how Hopefully I watch the national final live. It is Sunday, isn't it? And pretty sure it's Sunday. Right? Okay. Well, I think this is the next Sunday when
we listen to right for levers. So we've got a rock band. There's a rock song and every National Pie
now. Now, I'm not a huge fan of rock. Surprise, surprise, if you're following my
channel, you'll know that unless there's something about it that draws me in which is rare. And I haven't heard anything yet. That makes me as a non rock listener. Tap in it's the first time I've heard Polish
though. Hala to that 0.5 marks with a bit of Polsky I can tell
you is better than booty I mean, I'd rather it just go completely broke
to be honest at this point. This fits all right this part of the songs all right all right. Takes a while to get going. Oh, I've been harsh. This is all right. I should take it back down assistant to the last minute again. So right I can't even remember Natasha is now. I think this is better than Natasha is that
6.9 She's right. It does take a while to get going. Never back down. Joe I go as far as what I gave cou Kuba 7.9
I'm gonna give for believers. I want to give them a 7.8 Never back down
got much better as it went through the song and actually listened to it last minute again,
was probably a positive thing for me because actually, that song increased probably by
naught point four as a result of listening to the last minute again. That wasn't bad. Actually, that wasn't bad. Okay. Maya, Maya never never hide. never hide. Come on. Maya. You've got this. Is this going to be a bang? Oh, it's Belding come on Maya where she go in Santa Clara lyrics is kind of a bit on the
nose and cheesy but nonetheless, there's an uplifting message there. I'm just thinking about the whole kind of
package and I'm kind of taking my mind back to MGP Norway in the sense of a lot of bangers
in a national final and a lot of them just not progressing. How would this fare in Norway? I don't know. I don't know I've not completely written this
one off just yet. This has every potential to be my favorite
actually. It definitely does have a sound which I love. Just not sure this is cheese, cheese cheese
cheese bubbles bubbles bubbles with extra bubbles bubble gum pop certainly some good elements this I'm just
not sure if it's all coming together or it is quite cheesy this I think if no way southern Norway Poland selected
this. I wouldn't be able to guarantee with qualified
but I can guarantee I'd enjoy it some of these dancers are living their best
lives. Everything about this package is cheese cheese
cheese are included her family at the end? Is that message to her child. I don't know I'm a bit torn, because it has
the makings and ingredients to produce something that I would absolutely love. But I just don't know. I'm gonna have to put that as a 7.5. I just think something's missing in that one. And also something's doesn't quite come together. I think the thread that holds that three minutes
song at certain parts of that thread has a few knots my end not a bad effort. Not a bad effort. But I think yeah, I think Dominic's is better
and actually I probably want to listen to Cooper again before I listen to Maya, right, okay,
next Okay, so we have a young now, which is Polish for John. It doesn't. I know like pretty much most reactors have
reacted to this some way. And so watching all of these reactors react
to this song and obviously getting mad viewing wasn't the best thing or the easiest thing
for me but ultimately what I try and do in national finals is I try and list them all
back to back and you can thank litsea for basically delaying that so I'm finally
getting around to listening to this song. So there was quite a lot of hype about this
song both inside Poland and outside of Poland, I believe, but I haven't watched any of the
reaction videos because I can't because I didn't want to listen to the song. So I can only assume that people went crazy
for this song and the reaction videos based on the amount of views that those reaction
view videos we're getting. So this is probably the favorite array and
I will be honest with you. I'm hoping that for Poland sake I hope this
is good because I haven't heard a Eurovision winner yet. And I don't think I've heard a Eurovision
top five either come on then. Gladiator This better be a gladiator good voice this will be a nice evolution dark woods wherever Okay, so it is evident that this is already
the best song that I've heard so far. And what I meant by earlier in regards to
this is a very good evolution of Atkins river is that kind of operatic up operatic backing
vocal that we could hear in that chorus then which certainly played a key role in all Cummins
chorus in river so yeah, I quite like that that kind of lineage from last year. This is a decent song so far. The videos interesting Yeah, my dad so far this is the one that Poland
needs to pick I am loving the kind of choir backing vocals This is the best song like no other song comes close in regards to competitiveness
I like Dominic's but if Poland the thinking obviously for Eurovision and being competitive
so far, this is the one I like this musical interlude as well because
actually it kind of breaks up which is quite a kind of dark and intense production gives
you a breather which I quite like I like the shake up in this kind of yeah dance beat moment. You just see how he stays is this because
it was in a studio last year wasn't it? So I'm assuming it's going to be a studio
again it's not an arena might be an arena I don't know but it was a studio last year how long is the song Yeah, it did fit I thought
it was over three minutes so it's going to have to be cut by less this end bit is just
perfect. Oh easy Yeah, that's so far hands down the
obvious choice for Poland and based on the songs that have been selected so far, that
if that gets selected this weekend that will kind of massively shoot Poland up in regards
to the bedding odds Poland pick that that puts them easily from the songs that we have
so far must be shooting up into the top five and the betting odds from what we have. From what I've heard so far come on Poland. I do think Poland picks the best song Last
year I did like Darius paranoid but no outcome was the clear choice so we know that we can
trust Poland to select the right one. So there are still some still left to go but
that's the obvious one for me. Okay, so now we've got Blanca she's got mad
views so she's got 10 million views. Does that mean that this song is epic? Does this mean that we might actually have
a competition this weekend yeah I love it already. This has so much potential to be on my playlist
right now this is my favorite This is my favorite everything about the song so far. I'm obsessed with I really want Polaroid to pick this word. Now just quickly sorry blanket pause you my
worry last year with paranoia because that had been out for so long. had basically people got used to the song
do you see what I mean? Like if you think about all the songs that
are like big hits on the radio, you listen to them so many times you kind of get a little bit sick of
them very rarely do listen to a song kind of six or seven months after with that same
intensity. I am slightly worried that the song has been
out for quite some time I need to check how long gladiators been out for but this has
been out for over four months. Does that mean that there will be some apathy
with people at home and as a result they're kind of done with this song. I love this song I hope that I love everything about this song I'm downloading this so now I'd like a solo
easily my favorite bass Yes. I had Down down down down down down. I was asked to this I will be very upset if prank does not win. But like I said I'm getting the vibe is Gladiator
all the way unless something horrifically goes wrong on stage this weekend. Warner Music I suppose got 10 million views. She's got some money behind a big record label. right we've got one more Okay, so we've got
Janna with champion last song song number nine so technically tips on 10 This was all right it's quite simplistic. In regards to his melody, the chords but it's not bad. No bad Yan. I think you can thank Blanca Blanca gave me life. I think I'm still riding the Blanca wave. Which Yan is taking advantage of champion James champion champion feel like I've heard
this song before though. If if you're Eurovision freak like me the
year that we chose Michael race, he doesn't 19 the United Kingdom There was a song called
free which is similar s s. This genre or this sound? I've heard a few times obviously re packaged. But it's very familiar. This sound it's been shaken up now hit the note chain is cracked my neck yawn No. I don't know if you are going to be a champion
this weekend. Yeah. I'm a champion. Oh, what? Oh, what? A champion. You're gonna massively benefit Yan by being
last because there are songs that I do not remember. Ie even Cooper's is hazy now. Right? Let's digest woke up. top nine. Okay, so I've worked out my top nine. So in ninth place is Elena with booty yet
not a fan of that song. Number eight is Natasha. I don't really remember that song. And I think because for me, female bops have
delivered in quite high quality in different national finals, particularly Norway. I have them at quite a high bar. And Natasha didn't hit it an audit number
seven Maya. I listened to that again earlier to see whether
in fact I do love it because it has every potential to be a song that I could totally
love. It's missed the mark for me slightly. Something's missing in that song. And number six, believe it or not believers
again, I don't know if I'm pronouncing that right never back down. That's not a bad song. That's not a bad song, actually, and as if
you watch the reaction, the last minute I watched again and as a result of that, I did
kind of appreciate it more. Number five, I say my top five songs that
I probably will now add to my national final final playlists Kuba I actually am quite enjoying
the cheese. The cheesy element of Kuba song borrow borrowing
elements from the sound of Chaga whereby last year was quite sexy and cool. This one feels a bit more bubblegum pop. Um, number four is Yan champion. Yan with a way that massively benefited by being lost? Because it's in my head. That's not a bad so Oh, good. Number three Dominic, that's quite a good
song. Actually, that's the sort of sound that I
like. In fact, I was listening to Amy MacDonald's
first album, yesterday. I do like that sound. That's very much the sort of sound that I
do enjoy listening to. And then number two, number one, if you watch
my reaction, it shouldn't be too surprising. Number two is Yan with a J Gladiator. I can see why there's hype around that song
and can see why there's excitement about that song. I think potentially out of all the songs that
ponies got to choose from, that's the one that stands the best chance at competing in
Liverpool. And particularly in comparison to the songs
that were already been selected. That might be quite a wise choice. But my number one is Miguel Blanca solo that
song is addictive. within the first days, I guess it was like
shade you're gonna love this and then ended up being true that as long as the absolute
Jude so much so I really want to listen to that
word. Now that was my favorite hands down. I'll be honest with you. The gap between number one number two is quite
big. So obviously I was giving it a 10 I didn't
give up like a score at the end 1212 I've said that's the zone for me, but I don't know if
that will be selected this year based on what happened last year with Derya and paranoia. So yeah, good luck on So Sue. Good luck on Sunday Poland. pick wisely I've told you who I want to pick and I will be watching it from the comfort
of my seat in India. I will be in New Delhi in Shane in New Delhi. But I will be watching it but I ultimately
had to get this video out of the way today or it just was not going to happen. So those are my thoughts so please let me
know what you think. Please do comment below your favorite your
top three I'm interested to know if you're still here and you haven't subscribed
to my channel, please do please support it. Please click the notification button so you
informed if and when I post videos. And yeah until next time, stay safe.|||Infiiltrating forbidden territory right under the nose of the authorities. Sometimes, you just have to be bold enough and blend in to get inside the most spectacular abandoned places you can imagine. Disguised as construction crew on a busy working site nobody would ever stop you. But there is also another approach: Reach out to the landlord, be kind and ask for permission to explore the premises. As a result, we were able to visit this stunning decommissioned power plant, unique in the whole country. In our final episode of Poland’s undisclosed landmarks, we head to the colossal remains of grand industry. The exploration of two more powerhouses is the crowning achievement of a remarkable golden autumn adventure. If you enjoy our videos make sure to hit the subscribe button and click the bell to get notified when we upload new content. We finish our road trip series in the heart of Poland. This is Łódź. With more than 700,000 inhabitants it is one of the country’s biggest cities. In only a short amount of time during the 19th Century, Łódź was turned from a minor village to Europe’s most important textile metropolis. Today, the city is a testimony to the time of the industrial revolution. Factories from a bygone era lie idle and appear like post-apocalyptic wastelands. During our day trip to the city, we wanted to explore two of these sites. Let us start with the behemoth of Łódź: A massive abandoned power station that can be seen from many miles away. With its tall chimneys, the two impressive cooling towers and the solid concrete block in the middle of them, the whole premises seem sublime and not decommissioned at all. And yet, the 20-hectare land with several buildings was abandoned five years ago. We were told about security on the compound, and we were not sure about taking the risk. But then we came across two master urbexers who motivated us to venture inside. We tried to find a way onto the premises but getting past the fence was a challenge. Luckily, those two smart boys found a workaround. They were just leaving the property when we arrived. Now, we knew how to get inside. It looked like the demolition of the plant was already well advanced. But the construction machines have been idle for some time, so we hoped that there was still plenty of interesting stuff to explore left behind. Unfortunately, we were already too late to see much of the cooling tower. The catwalk was removed and so, we only could enjoy the view from downstairs. After five years of construction, this thermal power station started operation in 1960. With eight boilers and six turbines, the plant had enough capacity to provide power and hot water for the following centuries. With the growing demand, the site needed to be restructured multiple times. Later, it was decommissioned because of environmental restrictions and the development of the local heating market. In 2012, the plant started to shut down. In 2015, the decommissioning process ended. Come visit the plant today to experience a great scenery for photographers and adventurous people. But it is also dangerous. There are piles of rubble everywhere. It all seems like it could fall apart at any moment. But as long as you mind your step, you can easily enjoy a mind-blowing view you will not find in your everyday life. Just see for yourself! We are a few years late. Before they started demolishing the plant, there was everything left behind and explorers could experience a fully intact but yet abandoned power plant. A Polish explorer provided us with these pictures. He also helped us with some of the locations we wanted to see on our road trip. We highly recommend checking out his website if you are interested in more abandoned places in Poland and all of Europe. Find the link in the video description down below. Unfortunately, security showed up. They were patrolling and we did not want to get caught. So, we decided to leave before they could spot us. Although, we have not seen all of the plant yet. Today, the demolition of the power station is paused. The new property owner wants to turn this industrial wasteland into office buildings and apartments. But wrecking the place is illegal because the historic preservation office did not approve it. So, demolition needed to be stopped. Since then, the new owner makesheavy losses due to these restrictions. This is an attractive property. It has its own railway siding, it is close to the airport and the freeway. The compound is located in a busy area close to the city center. Thousands of people are passing by every day and by now, it became a well-known landmark of the region. If we come back to Łódź one day, there might be barely anything left of it. But until then, the eerie ghost towers overlook the city and point us to the next and final location of our Poland adventure. The main reason why Łódź became a town that big is the former textile industry. Spread all over the city, you can find old cotton mills. For our final exploration, we visit one of them. The remains of the most famous one, the Scheibler factory, are a construction site today. An investment group decided to turn the huge premises into a new and modern city district. During our visit in October 2019, they were in the middle of their latest building phase. Even in the UK where the industrial revolution started, there were only a few factories that big. Poland’s king of cotton was actually a German by the name of Karl Wilhelm Scheibler. He was one of the most important industrialists in all of Łódź. He owned one-seventh of the urban area and his spinning mill was the biggest one in town. Several thousand employees were working here at the end of the 19th century. Still today, the remains of the historical factory seem tremendous. Nature had taken over what people left behind; art was filling spaces once occupied by machines. The whole site was abandoned after the end of the Cold War. For us, this was another exploration with permission. We even got this tour for free! This was a great and actually the only opportunity to explore Poland’s most fascinating abandoned power plant. But since the whole site was a construction area, they were really concerned about us. To be honest, it was a bit odd to get all the safety gear and listen to a 15-minutes long presentation about safety in derelict buildings. We probably entered more ruins than these people. However, prepared like a real construction crew they guided us to the centerpiece of the facility: The historical thermal power station. During our visit, it was completely covered and people were working inside the building. So, we were not sure if we could experience the plant in its full beauty. Luckily, we could. This is a real industrial cathedral. Karol Scheibler, the son of the rich industrialist who built the factory, decided that they needed to be independent of any external supply of energy. So, a modern powerhouse was constructed around 1910. Unfortunately, there is not much left of the control room. However, many of the remarkable details can still be found in the turbine hall, such as the towering windows with their geometrical glass paintings. The walls of the hall are elaborately decorated with yellow art nouveau tiles. The tiles on the floor are checked and also ornamented. The stairs have impressive cast-iron banisters. The ceiling is huge and unique in the whole town. Although this is an industrial plant, it is more splendid than some of the palaces we have seen. Without any interruption, the power plant was operating until 2003. Many parts of the technical equipment were preserved, for example, the oldest turbine of the German company AEG from 1935. We say it in every episode of this series but we are really happy that two urbex photographers joined our Poland adventure. On that road trip, we were mainly focusing on shooting video. We only took a few pictures. That is why it is even more interesting for us to see the abandoned places from our trip through the lenses of our friends. If you want to discover more, visit tobi_urbex and a.nonyme_k.nipser on Instagram. We have added their profiles to our video description. Meanwhile, the derelict plant is part of a big project. On four hectares, several apartment buildings and offices get constructed. The historical buildings of the factory get transformed into restaurants, shops and communal areas. Old and modern architecture will be combined. This process is almost over. Explorers who came after us told that they were too late to see the power plant in its original state. The collapse of the textile industry was hitting the city hard. Many people moved away. Whole streets are grey and deserted today. In all of Łódź, there are relics of the industrial age. But something is happening with the forgotten plants. Art and culture are thriving. New life is breathed into old structures. Old Łódź is dead. But the new one is rising. Abandoned Poland turned out to be a dream destination for urban explorers. The country offers many historical places rich in variety with great stories, unique architecture and secret surprises. While sharing the episodes with you, many locals contacted us and invited us to explore their nation again. During our short road trip, we only covered a fraction of Poland. It is a huge country with many more abandoned places. This means one day, we will definitely come back for a second season of Poland’s undisclosed landmarks. Which episode of the Poland series did you like the most? Do you want us to go back and find more abandoned places? Please leave us a comment and a like. And if you want to support our project, make sure to visit our Patreon page where we share cool rewards for your help. The link is in the video description. Until next time and keep exploring!|||The most powerful fighter jet in the world
is now arriving in Poland. The 5th generation fighter jets are part of
the 90th Fighter Squadron, part of the U.S Air Force's 3rd Wing at Joint Base Elmendorf-Richardson,
Alaska. They will reach 32nd Tactical Air Base in
Łask, Poland, via RAF Lakenheath in England Once deployed, the unit will be referred to
as the 90th Expeditionary Fighter Squadron and will be supporting the NATO Air Shielding
mission. The NATO Air Shielding mission brings together
allied air and surface-based air and missile defense units under NATO’s command and control. the U.S Air Force said in its release, that
mission “will provide a near seamless shield from the Baltic to Black Seas, ensuring NATO
Allies are better able to safeguard and protect Alliance territory, populations and forces
from air and missile threat,” In this video Defense Updates analyzes why
F-22 Raptor in Poland is the worst nightmare for Russia? Let's get started. Poland is strategically located, sharing long
borders with Belarus and Ukraine The country has become a staging ground for
foreign arms and other military supplies heading into Ukraine. Poland itself had provided various weapons
like tanks and howitzers. The nation is also taking significant steps
to bolster its own defenses that include acquiring Abrams main battle tanks from the U.S as well
as howitzers, and aircraft from South Korea. Viewer may note that Russia has recently warned
the West. Konstantin Gavrilov, the head of Russia's
delegation on arms control said in Vienna, "Increasing supplies of Western weapons to
Kyiv may force the Russian Federation to take tougher actions," F -22 Raptor is an engineering masterpiece
designed for "First Look, First Shot, First Kill" It is the first operational aircraft to combine
super-cruise and super-maneuverability. Supercruise is the ability to have sustained
supersonic flight without having to use highly inefficient afterburners. With this F-22 can intercept targets which
subsonic aircraft would lack the speed to pursue and an afterburner-dependent aircraft
would lack the fuel to catch. This is possible due to the very powerful
dual Pratt & Whitney F119-PW-100 after-burning turbofan engines. F-22 has a speed of Mach 1.82 during super-cruise. The AN/APG-77 radar equipping F-22 features
a low-observable, active-aperture, electronically scanned array that can track multiple targets
under any weather conditions. It has a range of around 400 km or around
250 miles against a 1 m2 target. This radar can also be used for electronic-attack
by focussing its signals on the enemy to overload their sensors. The radar changes frequencies more than 1,000
times per second to resist jamming and has a Low Probability of Intercept meaning enemy
radar warning receivers are not able to detect that a radar lock has been achieved against
it Raptor is also now equipped with Link 16 through
which it can connect with military aircraft as well as ships and ground forces exchange
tactical pictures in near-real-time. F-22 Raptor is developed from the grounds
up to be stealthy. F22 is the stealthiest fighter ever built
& has a very low RCS (Radar Cross Section) of only 0.0001 m2. It achieves this due to its structural design
as well as the use of Radar Absorbing Materials (RAM). Raptors can’t be detected by most radars. Even if some radars are able to detect it,
they will find it very hard to track it and have a radar lock. Hence, Raptor can strike with its plethora
of air to air and air to ground weapons without the enemy knowing it is there in the first
place. Apart from Raptor, Poland’s airspace is
now defended by Poland’s own F-16s and MiG-29s, F-35As flying from Spangdahlem in Germany
as well as U.S Marine F/A-18 Hornets from the 2nd Marine Aircraft Wing (MAW) are also
present at Łask Air Base It is clear that sending the F-22 Raptor is
part of an increased effort by the U.S. and its NATO partners to boost the aerial presence
in the region as they face growing rhetoric from Russia. Russia has no operational 5th generation stealth
jet with the serial production of Su-57 delayed due to technical issues and may not commence
before 2027. Su-35 which is currently its most potent fighter
has been shot down in Ukraine with not-so-sophisticated systems and hasn't been able to carry out
proper SEAD (Suppression of Enemy Air Defense)) missions, clearly demonstrating it has many
shortcomings. In this situation, F-22s will provide a massive
advantage to NATO in case Russia initiates any hostile action against Poland. In April when a discussion in relation to
imposing of No Fly Zone was going on, US Air Combat Analyst Connor Hall, suggested to theaviationgeekclub.com
that “8-12 Raptors could sanitize the skies over Ukraine within an hour.” Overall it can be stated that the arrival
of Raptor in Poland is very bad news for President Putin.|||King From now on call me king On the contrary they don't talk well about you anywhere, Duke And now who are you facing Mr. Treasurer? The King Is it the only reason for your tears, Elizabeth? Take him to the dungeon! We’re in the West, not in your wild forest She's sweet... Don't forget about it! I’ll get you beheaded sooner than my severe husband would! I have the impression that [God] skimped on her brain|||Puck is a town in northwestern Poland with 11,350 inhabitants. It is in Gdańsk Pomerania on the south coast of the Baltic Sea (Bay of Puck) and part of Kashubia with many Kashubian speakers in the town.|||Hello everyone, welcome to Poland with Ela! 
I'm Ela and I'll be showing you around the most beautiful and interesting places in Poland 
and explaining the intricacies of our culture, history and traditions. And so in case you're traveling to Zakopane, Cracow or want to check out   some free museums to visit in Warsaw or see 
the Polish weddings from the inside, make sure you check out my previous videos. And in today's video, I will be talking about the Polish folk wisdom, but before we get there make sure you 
subscribe to my channel not to miss any of my future episodes! Folk wisdom is something that 
shapes who we are and describes our mentality.   Sometimes it's so intertwined in who we are, that we might actually not notice it. I actually started realizing it only when I lived abroad and though I spoke English, sometimes my friends had no idea what I was saying.  And here are some of the Polish phrases, which exemplify that. Take him away from here! In English it literally means "a 
bear's favor" and it actually means a favor, which causes harm to the person it 
was supposed to help. And this phrase comes from a fable, where a bear killed a hermit as he was trying to remove a fly from his forehead. This phrase literally translates to "split the bear's skin" and it means to get prematurely excited about something that we don't know for 
certain will actually happen, and it implies that we should not depend on something,  until we are 
sure that it will actually take place. I'm pretty sure that this phrase comes from hunting, when the hunters would go on a hunt and they would fight over who gets the bear's fur before they even found the bear. And I believe that the English equivalent for that phrase is "to count the chickens before they're hatched". This phrase literally translates 
to "the turkey was thinking of Sunday". And the meaning of this phrase is actually very similar to the one about a bear, the previous one about splitting the bear's skin. And if you're Polish you probably know the second part of this phrase, which is usually just 
implied and the whole thing goes like this: And it translates to: "the 
turkey was making plans for Sunday, but on Saturday his head was 
cut off". And I think it's pretty much self-explanatory. It literally translates to: "where there is two Poles, there will be three opinions". And I did speak about this phrase in one of my previous videos and you should see a link somewhere around there and I will also put a link to it in the description box.  so if you want, check it  out after watching this one.  But just to sum it up, 
we Poles are very opinionated. We tend to have a strong opinion on pretty much anything. And I think partially it's related to knowledge because none of us want to think of themselves as ignorant.  And you cannot have an opinion on something if you don't know anything about it. It does get quite tricky during debates and discussions,  when two opposing sides realize that they're getting closer and closer to a common conclusion. Suddenly they start to shift with their argument to end up in discussion  and not agreeing with their opponent. Because for many it's a point 
of honor to have a different opinion from their opponent. And on that note let's go to the next phrase. which literally translates to: "where two fight, the third one profits".  I think there is a an English equivalent to this phrase,  which goes like "two dogs strive for a bone the third one runs away  with it." And I think this phrase is applicable pretty much anywhere in the world. And now a typical self-deprecating Polish phrase, which literally translates to: "a Pole is wiser after the damage has been done". and I think this phrase might have originated from history, 
when whenever Poland was in danger people would always fight what it is that should be done. There were two Poles, there would be three opinions. And only after the damage has been done, everyone knew what it was, that should have been been done to begin with. But I think this phrase applies to pretty much every mundane daily thing, daily events and pretty much anywhere in the world. There is a phrase that has been ringing in my head for quite some time now, until I've decided to start a vlog about Poland.  For many years I've wanted to travel the world, make videos about what I see, what I experience. But this particular phrase kept coming back in my head. And it is as follows: And it literally translates to: "you praise the foreign you don't know your own." So I've decided to prove this phrase wrong and start a vlog about my own country. The last phrase I wanted to share with you guys is one of my personal favorites. And I don't know if it's the image that it brings to my head, or if it's the meaning behind it. But I think it is a good phrase to ponder. And it literally translates to: "the word 
has been spoken, the mare is at the fence."  And it means that no matter the circumstances, a person 
should stick to what they've promised. And there is an interesting anecdote related to this phrase 
that explains the origins of the story and the meaning behind it. so the story goes like this:  Back in the 18th century, a nobleman from the city of Łuków - Jakub Zaleski decided to travel to Warsaw to meet with the King John III Sobieski  to negotiate inheriting the lands and the office of the mayor after his deceased brother. He traveled by horseback, because that was the way to travel at 
the time. While he got to the castle,   they told him that the king is out hunting. So he went to the forest searching for the king, could not find him. He ran into another nobleman and told his story. The nobleman that he ran into asked him,   - what would you do if the king did not grant your request? And Zaleski, very full of himself, said: "then I will tell him to kiss my mare's ass!"  Well unsuccessful in his search, Zaleski went back to the castle, where he found out that the king was already there and could meet with him. Zaleski went to meet the king and realized that the nobleman he spoke in the forest with,  was actually the king - John III Sobieski. So John III Sobieski asked his subject - what would you do if I did not grant you that request? And scared out of his wits, but 
could not go back on his word, Zaleski looked at him shakily, and said: "well, the word has been spoken the mare is at the fence". The King was so amused with this bold answer and Zaleski's bravery, that he decided to grant him all his requests. Well, what can I say, sometimes it 
pays off to be bold and stick to our word, even in the most unfavorable circumstances.  That's it from me. Write in the comments if there is any other Polish phrases, that you would like me to explore. And see you soon!|||Today in the video I'll tell you what I miss from Germany. There will also be a Christmas competition. You can find out how you can take part and what you can win later in the video. So be sure to watch the video until the end. And right after the intro it starts. At this point again. Hello and welcome to my YouTube channel. Maybe I'll introduce myself briefly for people who don't know me yet. My name is Christoph and I emigrated from Germany to Poland about 4 years ago. My channel is all about Poland. I mostly talk about the differences between Germany and Poland, and I also show a travel report here and there when I've been on holiday somewhere in Poland. And yes, political topics are not left out here either. My goal is perhaps to bring the country of Poland a little closer. Also do a bit of educational work. And maybe you can round it all off a bit and say create a connection between Germany and Poland, or connect people to each other to simply clear up misunderstandings. If you like these topics or are just looking for a bit of entertainment, I would really be happy if you subscribe to the channel and activate the bell immediately. You can do that down here by clicking on my logo down here. This would really give you total support for me and my work . Thank you very much for that. Now let's get to the main topic and talk about the Christmas competition. But I think what's much more important is let's talk about the things that I really miss from Germany. As just mentioned, I lived in Germany until almost 4 years ago. That means I was born in Germany. I spent my childhood and youth there. I also experienced everything growing up in Germany . And I also got to know my first impressions of life and my first experiences in Germany. Accordingly, of course, there are things that I miss here in Poland. The first point I would like to address is friends and family: Personal contact with friends and family is now very sporadic. You might meet at special events. Or I, for example, sometimes meet my parents on summer vacation when we meet somewhere on the Baltic Sea, for example. Then I drive from Poland to the Baltic Sea. Then from Germany to the Baltic Sea. Sometimes we spend a week or two together where we can really hold each other and maybe sit together and just talk about God and the world in the restaurant. Contact with friends and family is primarily based on a digital level. This means that you mostly send each other voice messages. Or even make a video phone so that you can see each other from time to time. But there is still no personal contact. I met a lot of nice people here in Poland. But of course you can't compare this to a lifelong friendship or even family. The second point I'm addressing here is probably not for everyone. But it's German football. As some people know, I was born in Dortmund. For me personally, Dortmund is the number 1 football capital. In my opinion, football has a little bit of a different significance in Dortmund than in perhaps smaller cities where football is perhaps not that popular. Back then, we always took the opportunity to meet up together on weekends or on match days. That means friends and family. Maybe even have a barbecue together and then watch the game. It wasn't uncommon for us to go to the stadium ourselves to look at the players. It was all connected to a meeting. At the very beginning when I came to Poland I also bought a football subscription through viaplay. I think it cost me around 35 zloty back then. So I was able to do that too still follow the German Bundesliga and the German Cup. Nowadays my priorities have changed a bit. I really don't follow every Bundesliga game anymore. I've already canceled Viapay and, for example, the last World Cup, and that never happened before. I didn't watch a single game. My priorities have simply changed. I now also have a wife and child. There is also the YouTube channel which takes up a lot of time. And instead of watching football on the weekend, for example. I'd rather spend time with my family or work on my YouTube channel. There are also products and foods here that I rarely or never get here. So we now come to the third point. These are foods and products. Personally, I have a favorite shower gel that I have been using for several years. This is this shower gel from the CD company: CD products are available here in Poland. You can get CD creams, hand creams, body lotion here, you can also get deodorant rollers or other things here. But I have never seen shower gel like this here in Poland . At least not in the usual chain stores. I haven't seen a CD shower in German retail chains like Rossmann either . Where I 've seen a CD shower gel before . But there was also very, very, very little choice. Was here in these typical "German shops", which are really limited to cleaning products, care products and possibly sweets. But to also mention a price difference here. For example, a bottle of shower gel costs around €1.75 in Germany. And here in Poland it costs the equivalent of around €2.50 to €3. But I don't just have problems with shower gel. Anyone who regularly watches my videos probably knows that I also really , really, really like eating mustard. There is a type of mustard here that I can't get at all in Poland. And that is “lion mustard”. I haven't seen "lion's mustard" anywhere here before. Not even in German stores or anywhere else. So these are always products. Something like the lion mustard or the CD shower gel, which I always have sent to me regularly from Germany. That means I always get a package from my parents 2 or 3 times a year. And they always throw a lot of products at me. Which I can't get here. So also CD shower gel or lion mustard, among other things. What I also have to mention in passing is that Polish baked goods are really delicious. But I haven't seen one here yet . At least not in this form. This is “bee sting”. I've never had a good bee sting here in Poland. So I always take the opportunity when I'm in Germany to treat myself to a piece of Bee Sting. Let's stay on the topic of bakers and jump from there straight to the fourth point. One thing that I really miss here in Poland and that I really miss is that there is no bakery open on Sundays where I can buy fresh bread or fresh rolls. For me it was a given in Germany to go to the bakery every Sunday and just get fresh bread rolls. So that you can enjoy it in peace at home. I really miss that here in Poland. There are cafes here that are also open. Which offer a wide range of breakfasts. You can get something like scrambled eggs, fried eggs, bagels. With sausages, English breakfast. So that's really not missing here. A bakery that is open on Sundays where you just want to buy your fresh bread rolls. I'm just missing that here. In the tourist area everything looks a little different. My experience has been that in most tourist areas there is a bakery open here and there somewhere. Who then also offers fresh rolls or fresh bread. I can also remember a personal story. Where I wanted to go to the bakery on Sunday for the first time. I was at home with my wife. I got dressed and she asked me where I wanted to go. And I have Of course, he said very casually, "yes, I'm going to the bakery to get some bread." And then she said: “But which bakery is open?” and I looked at her and said: "I guess every bakery here is open." And she said: "No, the bakery isn't open here." Then I asked my wife, puzzled: "But then where do people buy her Bread and buns?" Then she said to me: "They buy it on Saturday." And that was just something that I found very, very, very strange to me, that people have to buy their bread and rolls on Saturday in order to be able to eat it on Sunday. But I have already found the ideal solution to this topic. I just buy a few more rolls a few days before, freeze them and then take them out for breakfast on Sundays. If necessary, I'll put them in the oven again to thaw. Then I have almost like fresh rolls from the bakery. But now let's come to the fifth point. And the fifth point will probably surprise some people a little. But what I'm missing a bit here is the German language. But when I talk about the German language, I don't mean hearing the German language. I'm actually more interested in conversing in German. For me personally, it makes a difference to be in your native language with someone you've known for 20-30 years. Here's perhaps a small approach to point number 1. Or when you're talking to someone you 've known for maybe 2, 3, possibly 4 years in a language you've learned. Or in a language that you have learned. I've already mentioned in one or two videos that my Polish is around C1 level. That means I can speak fairly fluently. I rarely have problems. But it has to be said very clearly that my vocabulary in German is much broader and larger. I also have the feeling that the cultural difference also has a small influence on it. And that's not meant to be bad or negative in any way. I just sometimes have the feeling that Poles are not always open to talking about every topic. Now if we just take the topic of politics as an example. And I know. Politics is a very critical topic. You have to be really careful, but people here are still very secretive. Even people you know a little don't like to talk about politics here. They also say that they don't want to talk about politics so much simply to avoid arguments. But it's similar here on TV. For example, if we now have five politicians at a table and the moderator too. Then you can really hear five politicians and the moderator speaking at the same time. Maybe it's just something I personally have a little problem with. Here's a question for the other emigrants. To the German emigrants. What language do you use in everyday life? Here in Poland, for example, I really only use Polish 90% of the time. I speak Polish with my wife and I speak Polish with my colleagues. I only use the German language when I record a video. When I talk to friends and acquaintances on the phone. Or when I talk to my daughter. I also speak German with her, but she doesn't answer me yet because she's still too small. But just to show. I actually use the Polish language 90% of the time here. And maybe that's just the thing where I say, okay, I miss the German language a little bit. Before we get to the sixth and final point , as promised, I would also like to talk about the Christmas competition. And you can win a game. A “Monopoly Łódź” game. This is probably a special edition for the 600th anniversary of Łódź. Łódź recently celebrated its 600th anniversary. They released a special edition. The game has been on the market for a few weeks now, I think . I think it came out on October 28th or something like that. This is also completely newly welded, everything closed. You can definitely win this. Maybe I'll pack a few more too Polish treat in the box. I would rather give the game as a gift. But since I do it on YouTube I have to do it in a competition. That's why I'm now forced to mention the competition conditions here. Otherwise I will have problems with YouTube. So it's a competition and anyone in the world who is at least 18 years old can take part in the competition. I also cover 100% of the shipping. For example, if you come from outside the European Union where there may be problems with customs. You have to pay for customs duties yourself. However, I will cover 100% shipping. Legal recourse is also excluded and anyone can participate if they leave in the comments. #Competition writes. I came up with it this way simply so that I can be sure that I only draw people who really want to take part in the competition. The draw will then take place via the YouTube random picker. This will all take place on December 10th. So on December 10th when the video was published. Somewhere in the video I will simply draw the winner. After that we have to get in touch somehow. Depending on email, Instagram or whatever. Let's see then. Then I'll definitely send you the game. Maybe with a few Polish specialties. So you 'll most likely get the game for Christmas before December 24th. That's it for the competition. Let's come to the sixth and last point of the things I miss from Germany. The sixth point has a little more to do with the geographical location. Where I lived before. As I just mentioned, I am a native of Dortmund. So I was actually very close to Holland and Belgium. I actually went to Holland or Belgium very often. Just to go on a day trip or just to spend a long weekend. I think everyone who comes from this region of Dortmund and the surrounding area probably knows how to go over to Venlo to see "2 Brothers" or go to the weekly market in Enschede. Or maybe even spend a long weekend in Amsterdam. These were my 6 things that I miss from Germany . At least the ones that are worth mentioning. Which of these things would you also miss? Or maybe there are other things you would miss? Please leave it to me in the comments and don't forget to write #competitors so that you can also take part in the Christmas raffle. With that in mind, I really thank you for watching this video to the end. With this you really support me and my work. Thank you very much for that. Stay healthy and see you next time. Ciao|||ch work work verified k for for for for for B business foree work for for for Allah|||Andrzej Szmidt Street in Wałbrzych Juliusza Słowackiego Street Magistracki Square in Wałbrzych City Hall Market Square in Wałbrzych Collegiate Church Mary of Sorrows and St. Guardian Angels Czettritz Castle in Wałbrzych|||you gotta shoot with your phone shoot with your 
camera shoot with your other phone shoot with   your i saw someone out walking their sheep i'm 
used to seeing people out walking their dogs   welcome back to the channel guys and welcome to 
beautiful krakow poland today we are going to be   exploring the royal wawel castle and the jewish 
quarter of Kazimierz so join us on this quick   adventure around the beautiful city of krakow 
there's plenty of history in poland and we can't   wait to check it out let's go our first stop 
today before even entering Wawel castle is the   Wawel dragon or smok Wawelski he is a mythical 
creature of polish folklore and he apparently was   bothering the people of krakow in the 13th century 
and in order to please this dragon they were   throwing cattle at him for a while from inside 
the castle but the the son of the king apparently   figured out how to kill this creature by filling a 
cow with sulfur and throwing it at the dragon and   then the dragon died so the statue of the dragon 
smok just outside the royal castle of Wawel it   breeds fire every five minutes and there's always 
people around it so make sure that you get here   relatively early to be able to get up nice close 
and personal with the dragon as it's breeding fire   it is a true spectacle it's probably great 
actually to come here at night because you'll   really be able to see that flame look at this 
little cute dragon i want it so bad little smok   as with every tourist attraction 
you are going to find people selling   souvenirs and naomi really wants one 
of those smok dragons gib a dragon   beautiful setting of this castle just facing down 
on the vistula river and we can't wait to go in   now and check around the grounds it's apparently 
free to check a walk around Wawel grounds if you   want an actual tour guide you do need to book in 
advance two weeks if anybody else have that issue   that when you see souvenirs you kind of want to 
buy it you know exactly you're never going to use   those souvenirs even if i was to buy one of these 
dragons i would probably look at it for a while   and then it would just die off somewhere in the 
corner or something same with me like everywhere   we go so far since we started traveling you go 
to all these destinations you see the souvenirs   and then you're just like i want this but then 
all it does is add weight to your suitcase yeah   that's the one thing i would love to buy souvenirs 
everywhere but we just have one backpack each so apparently this was one of the very 
first unesco world heritage sites that's   really interesting all of 
the travel that we've done   over the last year through europe and mexico 
and places like that we saw a lot of unesco   world heritage sites but this is one of the 
very first ones so wow excited to be here all of the gardens that are surrounding Wawel 
castle and the whole exterior around here that   faces down onto the vistula river it's absolutely 
stunning we were blessed today with beautiful   sunshine the sky is clear and we are very 
very happy to be exploring around here today   we're going to be walking around here 
just kind of taking in the views thankfully   you can explore around here for free but as i said if you do want to go in and explore the rooms   itself of the castle you do have to book well 
in advance because it is one of the most popular   castles in all of poland it's really astonishing 
to see how much work was put into this castle   the majority of it was built in the 13th 
and 14th century but every single thing here   every house everything is still standing 
so it's not like it's a castle that is just   lying in ruins somewhere just kind of 
neglected this castle actually is beautiful   and everything is still there and you can 
really imagine what it might have looked like   in the 13th and 14th century you can really see 
the level of wealth that the people that occupy   this castle had there is a lot of gold on this 
building that i'm currently standing in front of   one of the roofs actually just looks to be 
entirely made out of gold so very interesting   and it's so gold it's interesting to note like 
just the level of work that went into architecture   back in the day nowadays it's super 
straightforward you have like little red   bricks that they just cement and pile up together 
but back here in the 13 14 15 16th century   a lot more detail a lot more work a lot more 
beautiful we wandered around the castle and   found this absolutely amazing courtyard here 
and the entry to the castle or to the castle   yard itself is completely for free but obviously 
there are some areas where you would have to pay   i think to go inside the dragon's den where the 
smok Wawel used to live you would have to pay   and also for the museum parts you would have 
to pay but the general area here is for free   one recommendation for you guys if you ever choose 
to come here to Wawel castle is definitely to   show up very early in the morning because it does 
get quite crowded i think we got here around   10 30 maybe 11 o'clock and it's literally 
like filled with school classes which is   beautiful to see because a lot of these children 
obviously learn about their own heritage and   about their own history but at the same time 
it gets very crowded so make sure to be here   early well check this out guys it looks 
like they're actually growing grapes here   in the yard of the castle and i'm wondering 
if they sell like a special edition type of   wawel castle wine or something like 
that that would be absolutely amazing   the guys Wawel castle is getting a little 
bit crowded right now there is literally   every 30 seconds hundreds of kids and tourists 
making their way in to the ground so we're going   to try now and make our way towards Kazimierz 
or the jewish quarter check that place out and   show you guys some of the best cafes that we've 
found while wandering through Kazimierz let's go so first impressions Wawel castle what 
do you think Wawel castle is absolutely   stunning and it's a very unique place because like 
different architectures kind of clash together   from the different centuries and you can really 
see like i feel when you look around you can   see different centuries in different parts of the 
castle itself which i think is absolutely stunning   i 100% agree with naomi if you do want to get 
some spectacular views over krakow as well   definitely make sure to head up to Wawel castle 
it's entirely free to wander around on the grounds   but if you do you can book a ticket as well 
if you do want to do that um two weeks in   advance is kind of the go-to but there's plenty of 
tourists wandering around there so definitely go   and check it out check out smok the dragon as 
well the fire-breathing dragon that's really   cool we would suggest you guys to come in the 
evening after sunset if you get the chance   because i'm sure you would be able to 
take some stunning pictures of that dragon   so guys just to let you know we are currently on 
the quest to reach 5 000 subscribers so if you do   like our videos and you like who we are 
go and hit that juicy red subscribe button   and help us out thanks guys we just saw someone 
out walking their sheep i'm used to seeing people   out walking their dogs but walking a sheep i was 
pretty special and there was a guy dressed up as   smok the dragon as well i think that sheep was 
just thinking to himself why am i here why is   there a guy dressed as a dragon and can i eat your 
costume can i eat your costume so we're making our   way now into the jewish quarter of Kazimierz 
and it just runs parallel to Wawel castle   so if you are looking to imitate this little 
day of exploring like we're doing right now   all you got to do is head behind Wawel castle 
or go parallel with it and you'll find your way our first stop here in Kazimierz today is this 
beautiful alleyway where parts of schindler's list   were filmed even though this part of 
the city has never been a jewish ghetto   during the occupation of nazi germany the jewish 
people were relocated to another area of the city   and this area before the second world war 
was kind of a mix of jewish and catholic   people as far as we understood but parts of 
schindler's list were filmed here in this area we need a quick refreshment so 
let's go in here in a local cafe i ordered a lemonade but it kind of 
looks like a spinach nade let's try it's actually really nice very 
thick you can taste the acidic   part of the lemon but it's also very 
minty so it's not spinach is mint this area of krakow nowadays anyway is considered 
more of like the trendy alternative type of part   of the town where all sorts of 
people like artsy type of people   come together you find loads of nice little cafes 
loads of vegan places a lot of falafel places   all of these types of things here there's a lot 
of shops as well where you can kind of buy crafty   type of things like artisanal goods and handmade 
things which is really really nice but be warned   with these these types of areas obviously 
that are considered a little bit more hipster   the prices go up as well and i think we just 
what did we pay for the coffee and the lemonade yeah we just got like a super basic i got a 
latte and naomi went for a lemonade and yeah   for that same latte and lemonade in even in 
the center of krakow we would have paid around   30 percent less than what we just paid the latte 
that i got was nearly four euro and the lemonade   that naomi got i think was around 3.50 and if you 
go even to the center square of krakow you'll   probably find places where you can pay half 
of that so be warned if you're in the jewish   district or the jewish quarter the prices go up 
but you do have beautiful surroundings like this   obviously in the city center you will find places 
like starbucks or costa coffee as well where it's   going to be the same amount of money but this area 
is just a little bit more hipster and alternative   which you see all over europe really that 
type of movement and prices go up with that   gentrification what would it two what would a 
two mad explorer video be without a little bit of   food in it right four tacos with beef so we were 
actually on the hunt for some Zapiekanka cheese   and jalapeno but on the way to the market square 
where we wanted to get the Zapiekankas we actually   found this little mampf yard sriracha is perfect 
so a food court so to speak and we found a little   mexican stand called companeros we just ordered 
some tacos there hardshell tacos i'm looking   forward to eating this because we're both really 
hungry okay guys so here we are eating mexican   food in the jewish quarter of the south of poland 
in krakow super excited to try these tacos out   they're hard shell tacos and we just or i 
decided to just go for spicy on top of more spicy   because i like spice and we got sriracha sauce 
we got jalapenos they're layered with cheese and   i think they have like kind of a chili or spicy 
little nacho or dorito in there so cin cin guys holy sh oh my god that's very spicy yeah that has a kick to it 
this is gonna blow my face off i can't even i can't even talk it's too 
spicy very tasty but very fresh ingredients   but very spicy my face i can see it it's 
going red this is gonna blow my face off   if luke is dying i don't know what is going to 
happen to me this is gonna blow my face off  i'm gonna try and grab the 
jalapeno and put it aside if you can hear somebody breathing heavily 
luke is currently dying behind the camera so   this is going to blow my face off it's 
giving me a lot of hope for my future actually not that spicy it's 
good but like it's very tasty   but it's not as spicy as i thought it would be   that little food court that we just stopped at 
was amazing they had plenty of different types of   fusion type food so they had a mexican food stand 
they had beer they had japanese food they had a   bunch of stuff they even had polish food there as 
well so now we're going to make our way towards   Wolnica square which is supposedly the main square 
to check out in the Kazimierz district if i would   live somewhere close to this food court 
i swear to god i would be severely obese friends of ours were saying that they 
had their best ever Zapiekanka in poland   here in this exact square somewhere so we're 
still looking for the local Zapiekanka dealer   we're not too sure where we can find it to be 
honest i see a lot of sushi places kebap places   ice cream places bakeries but no Zapiekanka where's the Zapiekanka actually funnily   enough since we came to krakow we've been 
looking for Zapiekanka i know a few places   that sell it in the main square area of krakow 
old town but since we came here to kazimierz   can't really find any Zapiekanka so we're just 
looking we're on the hunt for a Zapiekanka to wrap   up today's video hopefully we come across it soon 
after the Zapiekanka disappointment we decided to   go with ice cream instead seemed easier absolutely 
yeah we came across a place called papa gelato and   you can't really go wrong with a name like that 
so i decided to go for the cream with pistachio   in a chocolate cone i can't wait to 
try this and i got a cream and apricot   yeah it's like seems to be naomi's go-to flavor 
she loves yogurt and she loves apricot as well so   we are gonna give this a shot see 
what it tastes like i'll go first wow that's very creamy for a cream flavored 
ice cream and i'll give pistachio a go pistachio tastes like pistachio it's really 
really good ice cream very creamy ice cream   and yeah it wasn't really that 
expensive either we're right here   in the Wolnica square or plaza so what a 
perfect place to come and enjoy an ice cream   in this beautiful weather here 
in kazimierz smooth transition   how insightful to say that the pistachio 
ice cream tastes like pistachio ice cream oh this is good i'm not really of an ice 
cream type of person but this one here is   yes so guys that's it from us today we are the 
two mad explorers and this is your reminder to   keep exploring so guys we'll catch you in the 
next video we are headed to a totally different   destination tomorrow but it's still gonna be in 
poland so stay tuned for that see you in the next   video thanks for watching bye bye thanks very 
much for watching this video we just launched   our community our channel memberships 
here on youtube so if you want to be part   of this community make sure to check out the 
benefits and perks down below all of this is only   possible because of you guys and with your support 
we will be able to keep going for a lot longer|||our first stop was by a small lake near Jelenia Gora here we got our first glimpse of the polish autumn, just look at those colours today we are going to visit the mountains sudety we're planning to see a little village town 
called karpasz today and maybe do some hiking well if Louis manages it basically hello hello hello so its colder than the netherlands by about 10 degrees, its about five degrees 
at night it gets down to zero i've installed a little diesel heater and 
we're good to go, yes we are, we are after a quick stop over at 
the world famous church wang in karpasz, we headed towards 
hiking trails at karpatka with all the warm autumn colors this place 
could easily be mistaken for an oil painting with our three lovely dogs it was a real masterpiece we are at the top of karpatka which is a pike right 
next to karpasz and it's just over 700 meters the hike up here is not bad at all um louis 
thinks it was one of the easiest we did because apparently, we started the trek halfway up! so it 
was only about 10-15 minutes to get up here to to be honest it was, dead easy and we're in the autumn look 
how beautiful it is everywhere it is gorgeous and right at the back you can see sniezka good morning this is our park up from last 
night nice little church in the background what is the plan for today sylvia well 
we had a plan to go and see uh wielkie kolo and male kolo sorry that was Lola, clearly very impatient for the walk 
but louie didn't get off to 12 o'clock so we're only going to see two waterfalls and maybe 
some rock formations that's behind the church that's it that's it see you there only a minute or two into the walk and look how beautiful
all the colors are here in poland we call it the polish golden autumn it's beautiful have a look look at it everywhere the nicest autumn i've ever seen Sylvia I know and these are the rock formations what are they called Sylvia? Owl rocks they are called owl rocks very random but quite impressive wouldn't you say? yeah its dead random how they are in the middle of the forrest but they are cool so we're all done here now we're gonna head to 
a waterfall believe it or not, what a surprise its my favorite thing to do, 
louie's like a waterfall goblin, yeah but as you can see from the drone footage we are 
in the autumn and it's absolutely beautiful isn't it i told you so cool when we were in england 
i kept telling louis that the trees there are very boring in colors and he obviously 
didn't believe me yeah that's what he does sylvia is always in competition poland against 
england aren't you, no! yeah you are, no I am not! anyway we'll see you at the waterfall this is the waterfall what do you think sylvia it's small and it's very busy we 
should have gotten up earlier and maybe then we had a little swim in it and 
it's still beautiful because of the surroundings its absolutely spectacular isn't it Louis? yeah, what's it called Sylvia? wodospad szklarski there you go, wodospad is waterfall in polish, I have learnt today I have added that to my vast vocabulary of polish but yeah its not bad, surroundings are pretty nice as you can see sorry like this the pine cones here the 
massive it's at least 10 inches huge, yes Louis clearly don't know measurements does he
but yeah yeah that's just about 10 inches after leaving karkonovsky national 
park we arrived at a man-made lake called rijora georgetinsky here we enjoyed the 
views of two historic castles, the first was Zamek-czorsztynski  the second was dunajec w diedziczy, they were both amazing after a bit of deliberation we decided to 
turn back around and head towards the most harrowing and heartbreaking places in human 
history the concentration camp auschwitz-birkenau the horror and inhumane treatment of the 
people who were forced to live and work in these conditions was unimaginable and our
hearts go out to the estimated six million people who were killed here krakow was a perfect antidote to the 
horrors we witnessed at auschwitz krakow's old town with its colorful and historic 
buildings was simply majestic and one of the most beautiful cities we have ever visited, so 
sylvia told me that this guy here is basically the david beckham of poland so i'll show you him 
there he is the sad part about it is he literally said help people do not make monuments for me and 
what do polish government do make monuments for him, true story very good pope there we go pope what's he 
called john Paul ii, john paul that's original there we are the overlooks, 
the bell, the beautiful church costume mariachi is a 14th century 
historic church known for its most precious world-famous architecture and it is 
surrounded by lovely and colorful park walks the old town's pigeons are 
another symbol of Krakow you can even feed them just 
remember only the grains that's right it's very nice full of historical buildings, don't! following a couple of hours drive we arrive 
at tatra mountains, tatras are the biggest mountains in poland with the highest peak rosy 
reaching 2501 meters our first trip was to the world-renowned mountain lake morskie oko, which 
translates to an eye of the sea it was magnificent we have arrived at morskie oko and it is beautiful 
isn't it Sylvia, it's beautiful and it's freezing as well absolutely freezing, it's minus three 
this morning but i don't think it's too bad now but we're here this is the lake the sun's not come 
over yet so we're gonna have another walk up the mountain to see the other one, what's it called? Czarny Staw so it's like a black something 
like a black pond so i'm gonna go there and then we'll come back down here and wait for the sun to come over But yeah really good look at that sorry, beautiful, look at that, pienkna! gonna die, keep going, one step at a time oh that was a tough treck its still about another half to go I reckon, to get 
the view of the both of the lakes, so I better crack on come on Sylvia! for once in his life, Louis is quicker at hiking than me only because i am dying 
because i'm still a little bit fragile after the drinking no to be fair first mountain I climbed at the start of the trip was helvelyn, i struggled like hell but i was about 20 21 stone now i'm about 110 
111 kilos i'm an absolute beast i can fly up these things no problem i'm excited to go up and 
see it place looks epic doesn't it Sylvia, yeah! to be honest i was ready to turn around many times as it was a hard hard hike made even harder by 
my belly full of alcohol from the night before but it was worth it, we even saw an ice cave and 
the views were becoming increasingly beautiful i might even say it was worth the sweat tears and blood 
that we put into this walk the views were pretty impressive but I was more than ready to head back down we are going down, we are going down, no more climbing for today crazy person she doesn't know it yet but we are
going for another treck tomorrow um all right silvia she's alright she's 
a good girl, annoying, argumentative next day we woke up bright and early 
ready for another hike we decided to see another mountain point called czarny staw gasiencowy so this is a much harder walk than the morskie 
oko route was just like a big road this one's a bit uphill stoned path but it 
is much more beautiful of a trail it's about the same distance apparently while the same 
length of time to get there but yeah this is what it's like uphill, that's Sylvia in the 
distance i don't think i'll be recording too much on this one because i am absolutely 
goosed from yesterday still but i'll try why why do i do this i don't know too old too fat! what did you say? too fat? cheeky git! I am offended! so today i'm back on the top form literally 
sprinting up the tracks and mountains look at look at him pretending that he's as fast 
what a liar seriously seriously though louis doesn't know it yet but we are 
walking to the uh valley of five ponds no we're not we're going to gasiencowy and then 
to the valley of five ponds, we'll see, we will but it looks good, it looks very good,
that's why we are here, Polska Polska Polska! so this is, wielki staw gasiencowy, that place! and it's very pretty we're gonna have a 
little walk around and see what the views are from the other side and then we're gonna go to the five 
ponds valley no we're not it's only hour and a half from here i've had enough of seeing blue ponds 
or black ponds or whatever the hell they are well i've had enough of seeing this face but here we are so really good the trail is spectacular uh much better than morskie oko i'd say that to be honest the morskie oko lake is prettier but that this trail was better this trail was better the views on the way up were spot on anyway we see on the other side my mate down there, he just said where are you going! and Sylvia said, waffled something in Polish and he went, good luck! so now i feel really happy he said its iced, so yeah, if you don't see us it was lovely knowing you all! if you see this footage please remember 
it was all worth it wasn't it Louis, yeah! ah, but that's the views, wow wouldn't that be enough for most of you, yeah, not sylvia okay maybe i am glad I have come up here, because this is pretty cool frozen pond lake whatever it's called look at that awesome, frozen little uh 
waterfall stream thing there don't be confused by the blue skies it is 
still pretty nippy isn't it sylvia oh, I didn't go far Sylw, yeah i'm 31 years old, erm, male, from Blackpool, sad I know! don't think we're going to see 
the five ponds, because that's the trail and there! so i think this is the 
point we're going to call it we will see because there's some more people that I am going to ask, no, its the point we're going to call it i'll do a nice 360. turnovers it is pretty epic well 
worth the uh the trek and the out of breathness here we go follow me Sylvia frozen lake, big 
lake that's, err,  what's it called again Czarny Staw Gasiencowy, that one! so yeah, we'll start making our way down i think so we are currently 1600 and 
24 meters, 24 meters high and this mad old bat here, thinks i'm going to climb even higher up there don't know if it shows on there honestly it's like snowden on top of bloody ben nevis 
this place is massive i've already walked 26 and a half thousand steps i'm done in 
and she wants me to go and walk and look at a couple more little blue ponds this blue 
pond is wonderful i'm happy let's go back now anyway, yeah, we will see you out there ah seriously honestly don't do this just go home stay at home 
just sit and watch a silly youtuber like me probably laughing at me I thinking what a fat bald 
idiot that's how i feel like a fat bald idiot ah still like three hours left to go as well, please! ah she's made it and she said louie 
it's shocking we shouldn't have come up and we are not even at the top yet! Sylw, we can't even see it! here and the clouds are coming over you happy with yourself wowzer  yeah you can't see me because 
it's pitch black isn't it sylvia you clown, we'll see you back at the van, because to be honest, no there's no to be honest about it never ever in my life will i listen to this absolute plank again oh look at the breathtaking views it's absolutely pitch black to be honest they are crazier people than us higher up yeah they're probably climbing with lights and stuff we've got no lights it's pitch black we have phones! all right we'll see you back at 
the van in two and a half hours if you like this video please like comment 
and subscribe to our channel honestly, i can't even walk anymore but i'll show you 
this this is Sylvia and her three neglected dogs all sleeping together you happy now Rocky there we go so it looks like i'm sleeping at the 
front of the cab today, good night|||back and i'm back with a snack see what they 
did they're back with a snack from poland   poland this is koopie i'm sorry no weeper carnia 
badge glow both i hope i said that right says both   nutritious and nutritious and delicious these are 
basically pretzels with sesame chia and flax seeds   provincial herbs oh here we go i like this   nice easy open they look like little 
bagels i love truth in advertising   and the smell of everything that kind of pops 
out looks like an everything bagel but minnie fire flames the heavens of snacks above this is 
money this is freaking fantastic it's delicious   not too salty either this is a solid nine nine|||Welcome to UnHerd, I'm Aris
Roussinos. Along the EU's eastern border, from Scandinavia
in the north, to Romania and Bulgaria in the south, troops
and jets and warships are being hurriedly deployed to shore up
the continent's defences. On the border with Ukraine in western
Russia and Belarus, a great Russian army is massing. The
border between eastern Poland and Belarus already witnessed
the first unarmed skirmish of this new confrontation, when
thousands of migrants were sent to breach the Polish border at
the end of last year. I wanted to find out what the atmosphere
was like on this new eastern front. UnHerd was invited by the
Polish army and border guard to enter the secure zone and take a
look for ourselves. On the EU's eastern border,
migrants aren't just a humanitarian challenge. They're
also an effective weapon to be deployed at a level just short
of open war. When Poland's government gave its full backing
to Belarus's opposition after last year's contested election
and crackdown on pro-democracy activists, Belarus's strongman
and Putin ally, Alexander Lukashenko, funnelled thousands
of mostly Iraqi-Kurdish economic migrants to the Polish border,
encouraging them to force their way through. The result was a
major crisis for Poland and a watershed moment for EU
migration policy. Militarised migrant pushbacks, once taboo,
were now praised by EU leaders. Back in September when the
border crisis began, the Polish government forbade access to
international press and NGOs, turning the border with Belarus
into a closed military zone. Now they've begun taking press on
very tightly restricted media tours of the border zone, and
UnHerd has been invited on one of the very first trips. Please. Follow me. Is the border guard - is that
under Ministry of Defence, or...? No. We are like the police in
the Ministry of Interior. This fence, which you can see, is
standing directly on the border line. Please stop here. Stop here – ok. What is the
situation now on the border? We are currently at the Kuźnica
border crossing. The situation is under control at the moment.
Nevertheless, there is a risk that migrants may try to enter
the European Union illegally at Do you see this as a form of
hybrid warfare from the any moment. Belarusian side? Definitely yes. It is definitely
an example of a hybrid war because all the activities of
the migrants were controlled and inspired by the Belarusian side. What was it like when it when it
was happening here? a kilometre from here. During
the next week, more groups arrived until about 3,500 people
were there. On November 15, Belarusian services sent these
people to the border crossing. The situation was very dangerous
as stones, bottles and parts of the fence were thrown at us.
Many soldiers, policemen and border guards suffered and were
injured in these clashes. Thanks to the cooperation with the
police and the army, we were able to repel this attack. Do you think it's over now? Is
that it? Do you think the Belarusians will stop doing
this, has Poland won? In Bremino’s logistics centre,
there are still several hundred people who are directed to the
south of the border where attacks are taking place.
However, we must be aware that such an attack may occur. The attack on the border led the
Polish army to deploy en masse, erecting a new military camp
right up against the frontier fence. Our camp is split in two parts.
Here is a smaller part, where we keep our vehicles. And we have a
medical section here, and some containers for living. Here you have an example of how
the local people support us, especially in this case,
children from the local schools. For example, here on this
picture you can see 'thank you for the Polish soldiers for
protecting the Polish border, and we wish you a fast coming
back home'. So it must be good for morale. Yes, for sure. If you see that
someone supports you, someone brings you food, and sends you
such beautiful letters, it is always very good for morale. So, how was the situation seen
in Poland, as a national emergency on the border? Yes, in Poland it's a
mainstream, right now, topic. Everyone discusses this. A lot
of people support services, police, border guards and
soldiers, in their hard work. This is a hard time right now. With soldiers, drones, and
thermal cameras, the Polish state has turned this bleak
stretch of eastern forest into a bastion of Fortress Europe, with
the European Union's blessing. So, in all the footage that was
seen around the world, of a big camp of migrants trying to break
through into Poland, that was right here? Yes, this was where the whole
emergency started. This is also where the first attack took
place, an attempt to cross the border by force. The camp
stretched from one hill to the other. In one week, 1,500 people
became 3,000. After a week, all these people moved toward the
border crossing and there were further attacks. This isn't just Poland's border,
it's the border of the European Union as well. Do you see your
role here as defending Europe as well? Yes, from the very beginning,
when we entered the European Union, we are aware that we do
not protect only Polish borders but also the borders of the
European Union. This border is its external border, and we are
responsible for it as well. It's your job to defend the
border, but we all saw the footage of migrants lighting
fires here out in the rain, in the cold. On a human level, when
you saw them close up, did you feel sympathy, or did you feel
sorry for them? Of course, seeing such pictures
a person must feel something. But we must protect the borders
because if we did not do that, then these dramas could be more.
To compare, in the Mediterranean stretch, many more people pass
by. Here, because we operate in this way, we protect the
borders, we stop the influx of illegal migration. Back in 2015 when Hungary's
leader Viktor Orban erected a wire fence like this to stop
refugees entering the European Union, EU leaders were united in
condemnation. 'The EU should be building bridges, not walls',
they said at the time. But now, a few years later, EU leaders
are united in their support for Poland's efforts here, sending
barbed wire, sending border guards, there's even a small
detachment of Royal Engineers here to help the Poles erect
these border defences. The Europe of 2015 already seems
like a vanished world. Hello. Hello. Good boy. All along the border, police
checkpoints have been set up to search passing traffic for
hidden migrants. Ninety miles south of Kuźnica, another
stretch of barbed wire is now the most active section of the
border, where migrants still attempt to break through every
day. Monitored by Belarusian border guards across a closed
crossing, I asked the Polish spokeswoman about the situation. Can you explained where we are,
and can you tell me about the situation where we are. We are on the section protected
by the Polish border guards in Czeremsza. This is where the
greatest number of incidents by illegal immigrants took place.
They were groups of several dozen people who threw stones
and pieces of wood at us, and additionally tried to cut the
barbed wire which allowed them to break through to the Polish
side. When you see the migrants on the
other side of this wire in the cold – it's bitterly cold here –
how do you feel when you see Seeing immigrants on the other
side, I fear every time. They them? behave aggressively, carry out
orders from the Belarusian side, I fear. I do not know what will
happen, stones and various objects are thrown, you are
afraid for your own life and colleagues who are next to you. Have you seen evidence of the
Belarusian security forces trying to help the migrants
break through, trying to break the border defences? Almost every time there is an
attempt to cross the border by the Belarusian side, they are
seen wearing Belarusian uniforms. These people cut
barbed wire and throw stones at us and blind us with light and
laser beams. Yes, yes, Belarusian soldiers are seen
each time. Migrants intercepted here are
escorted back to Belarus by Polish soldiers – a pushback
policy criticised by human rights groups as a breach of
international law. If you cross the border you will
be met with our strong reaction. What happens when migrants do
break through and are intercepted? What happens then? When those people who cross the
border are detained red-handed, later they are led to the border
line and returned to Belarus. Some people who want to apply
for international protection stay in Poland then. They are
taken to our facility in Polowce where they are identified and
then transferred to guarded centers for foreigners where
they await decisions. From the Baltic all the way down
to the Aegean, the walls are going up across the European
Union's eastern borders, and I doubt we'll see them coming down
again in our lifetimes. With the threat of climate change and
state collapse across the Middle East and Africa, this
militarised frontier here in eastern Poland represents a
vision of our continent's future.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||NOT BE PLAYED THIS YEAR. AND NOW BACK TO THE WAR IN UKRAINE. AND ALTHOUGH THE U.S. HAS REJECTED IMPLEMENTING A NO FLY ZONE. IT IS EXPLORING OTHER WAYS TO GIVE UKRAINE MORE MILITARY SUPPORT. THIS MORNING. THAT INCLUDES SENDING FIGHTER JETS TO POLAND. ALEX CAPRARIELLO EXPLAINS HOW THIS POSSIBLE 3 WAY DEAL WOULD WORK ALEX. GOOD MORNING TO YOU. ZELENSKY VIDEO CONFERENCE WITH AROUND 300 MEMBERS OF THE CONGRESS OVER THE WEEKEND DESPERATELY URGING THEM TO SEND MORE FIGHTER JETS TO THE UKRAINE. IT'S AN OPTION THAT'S NOW BEING SERIOUSLY CONSIDERED BUT REQUIRES OVERCOMING SEVERAL LOGISTICAL CHALLENGES. WE WE'RE LOOKING ACTIVELY NOW AT THE QUESTION OF AIRPLANES THAT POLAND. THEY PROVIDE TO UKRAINE AND LOOKING AT HOW WE MIGHT BE ABLE TO BACKSHALL. SHOULD PULL INTO SIGHT TO PRODUCE TO ROB OF SUPPLY THOSE PLAYS. A WHITE HOUSE SPOKESPERSON SAYS DISCUSSIONS ARE UNDERWAY WITH NATO ALLIES TO DECIDE OF POLAND SHOULD SUPPLY UKRAINE WITH SOVIET ERA. FIGHTER JETS. THE TALKS COME DAYS AFTER UKRAINIAN PRESIDENT ZELENSKY PLEADED WITH US. SENATORS FOR MORE LETHAL MILITARY AID AS THEY CONTINUE TO FIGHT OFF RUSSIAN INVASIONS. IN A LETTER TO PRESIDENT BIDEN. SENATORS ROB PORTMAN OF OHIO AND NEW HAMPSHIRE'S JEANNE SHAHEEN URGED THE WHITE HOUSE TO EXPEDITE THE TRANSFER OF AMERICAN-MADE F 6 TEENS TO POLAND. SHOULD IT GIVE IT SOVIET ERA MIX TO UKRAINE TO HOLD RUSSIA'S INVASION IN ADDITION TO STRINGER, ANTIAIRCRAFT MISSILES AND OTHER MILITARY HARDWARE. THE U.S. HAS ALREADY SENT UKRAINE 240 MILLION DOLLARS OF THE 350 IN ASSISTANCE. BIDEN APPROVED IN FEBRUARY. ALSO A BILLION DOLLARS IN SECURITY ASSISTANCE TO THE COUNTRY DURING THE PAST YEAR. THAT'S ON TOP OF THE APPROXIMATELY 12,000 US SOLDIERS DEPLOYED TO EUROPE TO STAND BY NATO ALLIES. SOME ADDED CHALLENGES TO THIS PLANE TRANSFER A PRODUCTION BACKLOG MEANS THAT POLAND WOULD ESSENTIALLY BE ACCEPTING AN IOU FROM THE UNITED STATES. IF IT WERE TO GIVE UP THESE FIGHTER JETS TO THE UKRAINE. ALSO THE NEXT SHIPMENT OF THESE US F 16 IS ACTUALLY SCHEDULED TO GO TO TAIWAN IN THE NEXT FEW YEARS. THAT'S A DEAL THAT THE U.S. CONGRESS MIGHT BE RELUCTANT TO TO PULL BACK FROM GIVEN ITS EYES ON CHINA AND ANY IMPOSING THREAT THAT THAT COUNTRY MIGHT PROVIDE TO THE WORLD ORDER OUT. I THANK YOU, AND MEANTIME, UKRAINIANS JUST BEGGING FOR ALL THE HELP THEY CAN GET. WE APPRECIATE THAT REPORTING.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Welcome to the- *German Bias Intensifies* You are not welcome in my- *Russian Bias Intensifies* *Taking fire to each other* *Is tired of the nonsense* *Angry as fuck in Poland* *Dead* *Rekt* All Hail to Poland!||| |||today guys we are going to be
talking about the differences between Poland and USA in relation to family
which i think is one of the most interesting topics really because I
don't think you ever discuss that before mhm
yeah so my background is I'm American and I've been to Poland like four times
now now I've been to the States a couple of times too so it's actually nice
because they also have this perspective an American family as a Polish person yes
vice versa with me yeah so these are the two people who have a perspective on
both so I guess we can share our input which will definitely enrich this video
and its content so yeah we basically said you know where we're from but I
want to add a disclaimer which is that like you know this isn't 100% true for
every Polish family and every American family said before all hate comments
come in before the backlash yeah before the backlash entirely just know that
this is just from our perspective and we are sharing our own view so it's
basically very subjective okay so one thing that I noticed going to Poland
a couple times now is that Poland seems to be more family oriented in like every
way possible everyone seems closer everyone seems
like they're hanging out more I mean when you see a Polish family it's like
we celebrate every single possible event together
birthdays name days Christmas Easter every every event in fact in your life
which you consider to be very important we just make use of every opportunity to
celebrate together no matter what is that mm-hmm might be even you know the
day of the dog and we're all gathered to celebrate yeah in the US it seems like
we're a lot more work oriented here and that like kind of I hate to say this but
I feel like families honestly puts second compared to work in so many
different cases and I mean this is just throughout like my friends my family and
all that basically Americans are more focused in their jobs and like making
money I mean the pursuit of money pursuit
happiness all that stuff yeah happiness this a good word
because I mean you work your ass off till you're like 60 or 70 and then you
retire you have plenty of money but do you actually feel like you did something
cool in your life except for working right I know because you know side note
no one's gonna even say man I wish I would have worked more when they're
about to die you know and I have a feeling whenever you visited my family
my home for the first time I actually felt you were kind of surprised or
shocked that everyone is like so yeah welcoming indeed yeah they started
treating him like you know his own family member I'm so shocked every time
I am shocked honestly yeah like my mom very often she has tears in her eyes
when she sees you I mean it's just it's amazing I don't get that with my own
family so I mean I even had like some family members kind of like not really
show a whole lot of support for my relationship with my girlfriend
basically do you just were not happy with him spending money on tickets to go
to Poland instead they wanted me to just go to school focus on school and then
just work okay so we're basically just rambling on with points but for the next
point we're just gonna talk about marriage okay so I was looking at
statistics for both Poland and us in regards to divorce rates and what I
found was that the u.s. is around 50% and this is going down just because the
Millennials are actually not even getting married right now
but with that being said Poland's divorce rate is around 30% so it's much
lower compared to the u.s. yeah I mean in the u.s. if you think about it it's
every second marriage that gets divorced yeah Wow and okay I mean I get it why
it's kind of lower in Poland because whenever you actually decide to marry
someone this is a lifetime decision and also I think a lot of Polish couples
have this mentality off not easily breaking up if something you know is not
really working out well for you but they try to fix the thing
which I mean this is like teachings of our grandparents for the most part
because you know this this is something my grandmother was always telling me
first tried to fix something and if that is not really working then make
decisions and personally speaking my parents are divorced and actually I
think like all of my friends parents have issues or our divorce or separated
or there's just something going on so like literally all of my friends have
divorced parents or some type of issue in regards to that so that's just
another thing I noticed in that like in Poland seems like everyone's family is
like super tight yeah think about that now I'm trying to think about some
examples from for example my parents generation like their friends or
neighbors who know I don't I'm not able to give you an example of you know couple
that got divorce okay so in the u.s. it seems like when you're kind of younger
like in your mid teens and especially when you turn 16 like right as you start
to drive you're kind of pushed into working and also pushed into leaving the
home by like 18 so this is really common and it's almost socially taboo actually
to stay in the house past 18 with your parents that's just kind of like our
society and our culture here like you're supposed to move out when you're 18 and
you know go live you know go live and we don't care about your future anymore
yeah you know a lot of parents are pushing for you know the kids to leave
by 18 typically wow that's shocking I actually remember whenever you told me
the first time we were talking you were like oh I actually have a lot of jobs on
my resume and I was like wow and you were just twenty at that point to you
know I was like wow you know I never met a person that age that would be working
so many jobs and there in the past like I think I started working like 14 yeah
farm since then no one I resistant in Poland yeah I mean people usually start
working like you know some easy jobs like under the table I can I would say
high school in college you know I would say like 50%
of my friends were working but the other ones were like you know just waiting to
finish you know University and it's it I mean that here like the thing is like right
as you graduate you have to have some type of experience usually on your
resume it's like at least something or else you're not even gonna get a job
even if you have the degree yeah and I mean going back to whatever you said
that at the very beginning in Poland I feel like parents did not only want to
kick you out of the house as soon as possible okay so I feel like if you see
if you meet a person like a kid moving out of their parents house at the age of
18 or more it's just because they wanted to do so on their own okay so another
example I wanted to mention is a very common stereotype in Poland which is
like the subject of so many jokes and all that stuff liking those skits mmm and
stand-ups and all of that so basically the relationship relation I would probably
should say between the husband and his wife's mother are you with me? I'm with you so usually
there is some type of tension between the two mother-in-law is usually making
some comments above the husband husband is trying to kind of talk back
this is so weird to me like I didn't know this this is not a thing the states
at least and I've never heard of it actually I really like your mom. Silvia, I love you. I'm
pretty sure she's gonna be happy to hear that but yeah I mean I know this like on
on the example of my family then I mean not always the relation between like
mother-in-law and the husband sorry dad is like you know perfect and I
mean this is very common across Poland if you ask people that's why we have so
many jokes and stereotypes about that crazy
I'll never understand that to be honest okay in the last point we wanted to
briefly touch upon is the thing it's hard to actually articulate that in one
like sentence or one expression but basically whenever you think about a
family a Polish family most of its members are living in one city or town
region I mean very close to each other when you think about American family
states are so huge that you can actually pick whichever state you want to live in
and I have family even like out in Canada and I mean these distances are
huge you cannot go and visit somebody like an hour or two like we can in Poland
right guys so that's actually all we have for these concepts and if you have
any more that you wanted to talk about or you want to share then let me know in
the comment section down below and as always
thank you for watching, see you later|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||a long long time ago there were three legendary Brothers called black check Andrews The Three Brothers went on a hunting trip together and stalked different animals in different directions black went North check went West and Bruce went to the east The Three Brothers founded their own countries in the places that they ended up you see where this is going right different countries tell different versions of the story but Czech started the check people and ended up as the Czech Republic Bruce started to roost people and ended up as Russia and Mike was according to Legend the founder of Poland they say he founded Poland here after witnessing the Glorious Sunset and white eagles flying around the Polish flag today represents this very Sunset alright I know what you're thinking what the hell happened to the name lack lack started the like I'd say indeed Poland used to be called lechia because of this in early European history the Roman civilization was the embodiment of Christianity and Christianity meant civilization to be formally introduced as a player in European history pretty much meant that your country adopted Christianity if not well we're a barbarian that deserves some crusading around the time that the title emperor of West Rome passed on to the Germanic people and the Holy Roman Empire was established the tribes east of the Empire and the lechia region were still uncivilized because they believed in different religions one of those tribes the fools became the Catalyst for government systems with the chief of the polls miyazeko the first officially being baptized in 966 A.D Poland makes its first appearance into European history as the duchy of Poland alas it's going to go through several cycles of deletion and creation over the next centuries let's set sail for Poland the tragic country ha ha ha the duchy of Poland was officially recognized as a member of the European World unfortunately it was forced to immediately play tower defense against the feudal Lords from the Holy Roman Empire meanwhile they tenaciously conquered territory up to the Baltic coast and the Kiev regions building the foundations for a country finally bullshaw the first the brave son of miesgo the first elevated this humble duchy to a proper Kingdom it even started to spread Catholicism to the Infidel natives in the baltics unfortunately the princes went all Game of Thrones on each other and split the country up among themselves into humble duchies once again divided Poland lost control of the Baltic Sea and was forced back Inland wielding the age-old casis belly of we're saving your soul by forcing you to adopt Christianity you know what's coming the Crusades the Catholic Knights flocked here most of them being Germans from the Holy Roman Empire they built up fortresses here evicted the natives and claimed this land for themselves what else would Jesus do the Polish Dukes were unable to come together you see one of them the Duke of a region called masovia up big time he officially requested the help of the Teutonic order to exterminate the Baltic natives in their front yard sure the Teutonic order gladly crusaded the well hell out of these native infidels but then they just squatted here and created a new Crusade country with the livionian brothers of the sword the Polish Dukes didn't dare to speak up in case they pissed off the Pope after all the Crusade country is claiming to squat here and spread the holy word of God for all eternity and it would be heresy to disagree with this right they had no choice but to just let this German country pop up in the north I hope you're getting bad vibes already Holland finally got their together in the 13th century settling their differences and uniting if you watch this channel the 13th century should give you very bad vibes here comes the unprecedented day of judgment the Mongol Stampede in 1206 the Mongol Empire eviscerated Central Asia and pressed the attack to invade the roost tribes the proud give duchy was trampled into the ground the traumatized survivors fleeing into the kingdom of Hungary and the end of the world by the hands of the Demonic Horsemen was imminent the Mongol forces finally arrived at the Carpathian Mountains in 1241 and you bet that Poland Hungary and the Holy Roman Empire were pissing their pants in absolute Terror the Mongolian Army wanted to stabilize its flank before properly invading Hungary well that meant that Poland was  the capital Krakow was overrun instantly and Warsaw also died soon after the Mongols invaded deep all the way into the Celestia region before the Polish duchies finally understood the severity of their situation their entire civilization could literally be deleted here time to fight everybody knew that Poland was just the beginning Hungary and even the Teutonic order put aside their puny differences and sent reinforcements in legnesia Celestia the desperate last stand for survival against the Mongol hordes ignited but the Mongols were just too strong over ten thousand soldiers were snapped out of existence along with the Duke of Celestia Henrik II there was nothing left to unite over the Mongolian horde thankfully went away on their own because of their own internal conflicts without directly ruling Poland but this wasn't the end of their struggles by any means the Mongols kept sending wave after wave of Invaders and the opportunistic Teutonic order backstabbed and attacked once more now that the imminent Mongol threat was over it was pretty much Anarchy the local nobility Warlords greedily extracted every pound of Flesh from their peasants while Celestia was annexed by Bohemia a unified pool and was completely out of the question until the Mongols finally  off for good in 1287 and 1333 Casimir III the greats Rose to the throne United The Divided duchies crippled the power of the nobility Warlords and enacted several revolutionary policies to rebuild his country from the rubble [Music] there was a good reason why Casimir III the great was called the great he was an absolute b-set diplomacy he conquered Galicia a part of the Fallen King of duchy and donated the Celestia region to Bohemia as a practical Diplomat I mean Bohemia was going to take it regardless so might as well Salvage the cookie points right the real problem was the backstabbing of the Teutonic order Casimir buddy buddies up with the grand duchy of Lithuania to make them think twice before they pull some chicanery you see the grand duchy of Lithuania was a country founded by Baltic Natives and they didn't believe in any of that Christianity nonsense yet the Teutonic order was moralizing and shoving them around for being infidels and so the enemy of my enemy is my friend do you see how difficult of a situation Poland is in right now they have to keep up the appearance of being devout Catholics to stay in the favor of the Holy Roman Empire before they send in another Crusade but their best friend is also a staunch Infidel Poland takes the man masterful Middle Road and sends in missionaries to Lithuania to make a half-assed attempt to spread the holy Gospel of God meanwhile Poland also donates half of the recently conquered Galicia region to not antagonize the infidels alas no King rules forever and the stability he built died with Casimir III the great kasmir had no son the next in line to rule Poland was his niece called yadwiga yeah yadwiga was female which was a big No-No at the time but most importantly she was only 12 years old Poland just barely climbed out of the best of the recycling bin but it looked like they were about to get banished into territory yet again in this time of great crisis Lithuania pulls the ultimate bro move and repays its debt by becoming the knight in shining armor you see they're both scared shitless of the Teutonic order and it's Dreadful Purge infidel's move Lithuania suggests to just merge kingdoms Holland accepts on the condition that Lithuania officially converts to Catholicism Lithuania says whatever and in 1386 the Grand Duke of Lithuania ugalia marries Queen yadwika Poland teamed up with Lithuania now stronger than ever and decides to finally kick the out of the cancerous Teutonic order once and for all on July 15th the 1410 they throw everything they have to get out under the thumb of these religious scourges in an epic showdown at the Battle of grenwald the Teutonic order was finally defeated the moment of Glory for Poland is finally approaching this is what all its struggles were for the Polish Lithuanian Alliance recruited other Christian nations to hold the line against the growing threat of the Ottoman Empire they also ironically forged an alliance with the Mongolian golden horde to give Russia a satisfying kick in the nuts Poland was the new sheriff in town and of course they took this opportunity to grief the neighboring Noob countries just because they could with this newfound power you know that they just had to act on their centuries of resentment against the Teutonic order Poland punched them so hard that the Teutonic order got annexed into Poland Russia is obviously now in 2022 a country that doesn't easily turn the other cheek you should check out our video on the history of Russia to fully understand why Russia is so aggressive a monstrously resentful Russia attacked Lithuania in 1487 and Lithuania was about to just completely die by the mid-1500s Poland and Lithuania decided to completely merge governments in 1569 with the Union of Loveland and to stay alive born again as the mighty polish Lithuanian Commonwealth they were the rising superpower in east Europe their primary military strength came from the Ukrainian Cossacks and the Baltic hussar Horsemen the era of the horsemen is here this polish light Cavalry Army is the famous winged hustler in the Polish terrain mostly made up of flat Plains the deadly winged Husser soared around like their namesake even ravishing the ottoman-controlled Crimean Peninsula and russian-controlled Moscow like a dragon the winged Hustler's Unstoppable charge empowered the Polish Lithuanian Commonwealth as the Godfather of east Europe alas times were a changing the modern era was coming up and it's time for Poland to Fall From Grace yet again the newer neighboring countries were centralizing and establishing better systems of government Poland a country whose nobility always had a concertingly strong influence over Central Command was unable to adapt to The Changing Times and established a stronger centralized government they completely missed out on the chance to modernize their politics economy and Military the events of gunpowder meant that the winged hussar started to get shot out of the sky more and more and the antiplated system of serfdom meant that the still medieval bullets produced less stuff compared to other countries the Teutonic order don't forget about them evolved into the duchy of Prussia and was just waiting for the opportunity to declare independence and get out finally in the mid 1600s Poland starts its inevitable downhill trajectory yet again you see the Ukrainian Cossacks rebelled against the Polish nobilities oppression and excessive taxation Russia still grinding attacks that never forgets couldn't resist but to take this cheap shot to make matters worse even Sweden invaded from the north the double-edged sword of the Polish planes oh so convenient when Poland had an Unstoppable light Cavalry also meant that Poland had no way to defend itself when hit the fan and everybody turned hostile thank you because enemies were pouring in from every single Direction polish history refers to this period of time as the Deluge or giant flood polish strategic strongholds were all overrun and even the one subdued tectonic order now Prussia successfully went rogue and declared independence the proud polish Lithuanian Commonwealth that was on top of the world was now forced back into its tiny box of an anxious brittle Nation the Polish military was well very sad about this whole situation it was ganged up on by Prussia Austria Russia and the Ottoman Empire and pretty much died treated only as a pitiful buffer zone the neighboring countries were more than happy to make Poland eat all the collateral damage in the mid-1700s Russia punched the lights out of Sweden and ripped away the Baltic Sea Russia was now also winning the slugfest against the Ottoman Empire cheerfully gobbling up the Balkans things look really dire right now in east Europe and it's clear that Austria is next is really starting to panic coincidentally an anti-russian Revolt erupted in Poland and Prussia enacts this Masterwork of diplomacy to Feast on their sorrow Prussia tells Russia all right look here you might as well just invade Poland because of this incident and Russia loves that idea Austria will also chip in and Rob Poland of the Southern regions while Prussia would just claim some leftover territory in 1772 this deal was executed and all three countries flooded in to invade Poland instantaneously this is the first partition of Poland Poland's Capital was already overrun so Poland had no choice but to just let it happen the foolish Lithuanian Commonwealth feel it in their bones that their entire existence is about to get deleted they swallow their pride and desperately broke her in Alliance with their local devil Prussia to try to stop the Russian Advance they realized their mistake now the nobility had too much power retroactively trying to unfuck themselves government policies limiting the power of nobility were hastily enacted how do you think the nobility reacted to this yep they just switched sides and actively helped the Russians plunder Poland their untrusty Ally Prussia of course sat back and watched as Poland went up in flames in 1793 Prussia and Russia suddenly decided that they were cool after all and divvy up Poland yet again this unfortunate incident is the second partition of Poland whatever reform Poland attempted went out the window Poland was barely hanging on to the small territory it was allowed to have left Poland sees that the end is near Brave polish insurgents unwilling to accept this doomed fate rise up in Rebellion but they just made matters worse you see they just served the Hostile neighboring Nations a bulletproof justification for war on a silver platter Prussia Russia and Austria gleefully answer this cast spellian invade Poland splitting the remaining territory among themselves in 1795 Poland was completely deleted from the world map this is the third and last partition of Poland because you know there was no more Poland left for partitioning Napoleon made his earth-shattering rise in 1806 and blasted Poland's worst enemies Prussia Austria and Russia into a coma the polls now literally country-less try to assist Napoleon and fight towards independence by seizing this moment and revolting as insurgents Prussia retreated from Poland in 1807. Austria followed suit in 1809 and Poland finally won its independence again as the duchy of Warsaw the pools vitriolically joined Napoleon in his invasion against Russia hoping to return some of the pain well you know how this goes their Invasion dragged on until winter the Russian gold killed just about everyone and Napoleon got exiled the Congress of Vienna a meeting meant to discuss how do we France also decided to delete the duchy of Warsaw again out of spite in 1815 not even a decade after hard-earned Independence the partition of the duchy of Poland was enacted and Poland just ceased to exist for the next hundred years a century later in 1914 World War One started and the whole region of Poland became a brutal bloody Battleground for German and Russian soldiers the Polish conscripts caught up in the middle were tragically forced to kill their own fellow poles in a war that they had nothing to do with with Germany's surrender in 1918 Poland finally won Independence yet again after 123 years you know what happens next right Hitler of Nazi Germany wanted to attack France and Stalin of the Soviet Union wanted to not have a war with Germany again the two countries came to the compromise of let's invade Poland together as a term for their non-aggression pact in 1939 Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union invaded Poland and Unison and Poland was deleted from existence yet again in the aftermath of World War II the Soviet Union forced Poland to adopt communism born again as the Polish People's Republic Poland spent most of the remainder of the 20th century as a satellite country for the Soviet Union 21st century Poland a war-torn country with a history of casually being erased from existence is determined to not let that happen again they understandably don't take any half measures with their military spending Poland is now a proud country of the first world and preparing against Russian aggression almost as if they know what it's like to lose a country multiple times as of October of 2022 Poland is one of Ukraine's biggest supporters in its war against Russia not only have they welcomed millions of Ukrainian refugees they're doing everything possible to supply Ukraine with weapons and Logistics it so desperately needs after all as far as Poland is concerned they're next after Ukraine and they would much rather not have a war on polish territory again even going as far to supply a staggering 1 1.7 billion dollars worth of military equipment way out of proportion considering Poland's GDP Poland is gritting its teeth and antagonizing Russia by supplying Ukraine with everything they need to fight a war what about the other side of the story why is Russia making us anxious about a literal nuclear apocalypse check out our video on the history of Russia to learn about the historical and geographical context behind Russia's actions Beyond a convenient hand wavy Putin is evil this has been your captain David Bradford from knowledge Raiders and please share this video with friends if you liked it|||good morning we are at my grandma's house 
it's Monday August 8th and we are gonna go   on a little trip for a week to Poland together 
with my grandma with my mom my dad Stefan is   mine Vince already in Poland on our fencing 
Camp so we'll pick him up after our holiday   Milo we are all packed ready to go this is 
our van we rented this for now we're gonna   drop a dog off first and then we're gonna 
get a newspaper because I'm gonna touch   newspaper there's mine in the dog hello hello 
oh Milo dropping the dog off at the shelter got a milkshake and a pretzel for lunch we are at 
a gas station in Czech Republic we found a little   um pizza place so we're gonna have dinner here 
it's almost seven so we are in a Czech Republic   right now we left around eight o'clock this 
morning and we dropped off my grandma's dog and   we just drove and we had a few stops and right 
now we're still maybe like one hour away from   where we're going in Poland but we're driving 
food to check Republic because it's easier so   um yeah we figured we'll have dinner here because 
we don't know what's open in the area or if   there's anything in the area at all because we're 
kind of the forest there strings Steph are you an   alcoholic because it seems like it it's like beer 
no yeah that's what every alcoholic says [Music]   I'm just gonna capture my excitement while it's 
still here and I'm sure it's gonna come back in   many many ways but we arrived at our little 
cabin here in Poland in kind of in the middle   of nowhere in a very small town or close to a very 
small town and um so we have top floor it's a two   floor two-story cabin and we have the top floor 
with our family we have four bedrooms a bathroom   like a full bathroom and a separate toilet and a 
little kitchen and a little living room and I'll   show you the outside tomorrow but I'll show 
you a little bit right now I can't even talk   cause I'm so excited and I mean look at this 
it's just so adorable a big mirror this is my   parents bedroom or staff Steph's bedroom so they 
made it into a single bed just very cute just old   iron for your clothes and just these lights and 
everything is just stunning and then down there   is the entrance I'll show you that later and over 
here you can peek outside it's like our outside   um sitting area and just the house is very polish 
yeah this is my parents bedroom what a beautiful   mirror just Swire they have a little sitting area 
nice bed closet and more paintings and everything   and all the way over here there's one toilet I 
don't even know where the light switch is here   just a separate toilet and this is where my 
grandma sleeps all the way to the back of   the house your closet mirror paintings everything 
just in the same style and this is our family room   hi our table ending I don't know if the Mages or 
bought this but we they made it she made she made   it herself and this is I guess some Polish cake 
that we can have but we're kind of full and over   here is our full bathroom so we have a shower on 
the left oh looks like a nice shower head and some   towels that my grandma brought and the toilet and 
everything another mirror a lot of mirrors here   and then last but not least we have a 
fridge and just a small kitchen [Music]   um also which is fun to know is we brought our 
rice cooker my mom bought this in the Netherlands   I just took a shower also I want to say 
it's like 14 degrees Celsius outside   right now so it's actually pretty 
cold up here in the mountains it   is 7 30 in the morning and look how 
quiet and peaceful it is over here so beautiful it is only 11 degrees right now and all I 
can hear is Birds insects on my own voice   I love this and we are gonna go weeping 
my mom my dad Steph and I we're gonna   go visit Finn at his fencing Camp because 
he has some laundry and we're gonna pick   that up we're gonna get some groceries some 
breakfast and that's what we're gonna do first   this is the house we're staying in we have the 
top floor the downstairs is for the people that   live here and we can be in this Garden and 
the little indoor patio we made some goodie   bags for the fencing kids they're all Dutch 
treats and everything we just got groceries so we soft in my little brother this morning 
and he had a little gift for us from Italy he   bought a bottle of wine from Venice and it's 
so sweet he brought it all the way to Poland   as a gift and oh it's so adorable right now 
we also picked up his clothes because they're   dirty so we are doing laundry right now but we 
don't have a washing machine so I'm gonna show   you how we're doing and my mom and grandma are 
busy doing laundry over here starting fencing   so we used this which you used to mash 
potatoes this is the money we use here   these are polish zlaties this is 150 20 and all 
the coins very tiny look at this it's so small   and here we have euros and then my dad also 
still has his Taiwanese money in his wallet we are going for a little one [Music]   foreign [Music] Tuesday morning almost afternoon and we are 
gonna go on a little boat trip kind of like   rafting but on um more Still Waters I put on 
a like I don't know sports clothes but I'm not   bringing my camera unfortunately because I'm 
afraid it might get wet and we don't want that   and then today another adventure I bought just 
my sweater and I put a top on and pants and we   are going to a skull Chapel a chapel in which you 
can find Cuban bones kind of weird kind of cool   we are here after about like a 30 minute drive 
the Chapel's over there we parked the car look   at just my outfit we will have to wait in line 
for a little bit because I think that's where   they keep all the skulls and this is just the 
church so this is the ticket but we can't films   so that's the chapel we just saw and this is the 
church and then over there is the cemetery the   modern one we went to this amazing farm where they 
showed us how to do Pottery as well as a few very   beautiful traditional houses we learned how they 
make bread and other things my Dad tried to make   this fake cow we saw some farm animals and Steph 
tried to walk on these traditional crutches there   were more animals and it was just fun together 
we then went for lunch at this restaurant in   the town I had this amazing common bear it was 
truly delicious and look at that cheese we went   to a park walked around the town and then it was 
time to go to the mineral Museum where we looked   around for a little bit and then we went to Czech 
Republic to a supermarket look at that bread and   those sausages this polish dish for us so this 
is what we're gonna have for dinner tonight   we are going on a little high you are 
prohibited from stealing Christmas trees we got a little thread with some custard we got 
back home from the walk we just had lunch it's   12 50 staff use mine and my dad are gone they're 
visiting some Museum or some tunnels or whatever   anything something to do with war so my mom 
my grandma and I are still at home we want   to make goulash for dinner um so we want to make 
it on the fire outside rather than inside in the   kitchen so I'll show you what we need we need this 
huge pot or that one either one is fine and then   I'm gonna get some wood from the woods and we're 
gonna build a fire or well like I'm gonna build   the fire and then we can put the pot on the fire 
and cook the meat it has and the vegetables and   everything as they cook for a couple hours so 
we're just gonna put it on there keep the fire   warm and I hope it's going to be a little more 
Sunny now because it's not too sunny hmm this is   our garden by the way it's pretty nice it's quite 
big and then over there is like the fireplace now   first we're gonna cut the vegetables in the meat 
we got all the ingredients except for the meat and   we got some hot water to clean this pot because 
it's kind of dirty on the inside as you can see   there's probably some spiders in and around them 
too and that's where we're gonna cook our dinner   I don't know what guys are always saying it's 
hard to make fire but we just did it in one try the meat adding the vegetables so this 
is how it turned out we're eating it with   rice it looks so good we left my Grandma at 
home and we're visiting a casa today so look   at that we're visiting a castle today 
because it's kind of rainy jumping on these walls the outside walls are three and a 
half meters thick the beautiful city of clotsko and the castle all hidden in green apparently 
they like shot a movie polish movie in this   Fortress so they have all these pictures of 
it pretty cool we got drinks and we're waiting   for the food over here in the center 
of Costco says fungi and salami Pizza   use mines vegetarian pizza this is like 
Cheetos with potatoes or whatever and   this is gnocchi in a very not gnocchi style 
but with a lot of cheese look at the cheese our host brought us traditional polish 
cake or pie yummy good morning it's 7   40 we woke up at seven we are packing and 
getting ready to go back to the Netherlands   why are you sitting here and not helping us pack I 
fell off a mountain yesterday well you didn't fall   over Mountain oh you tripped I slipped and then I 
hurt my knee so my knee is now a little bit oh no   thicker and it hurts too much to walk actually 
so actually I cannot even walk but okay I just   want to but luckily you got a very strong kids 
yes I'm not allowed to help Mel by the family we   just picked up breakfast like a pizza Little Bread 
something we are stopping for dinner at McDonald's   thank you guys for watching I hope you enjoyed 
this video it's not Taiwan but it's Poland and um   it's not the Netherlands but there will be a video 
on that soon I very much enjoyed shooting this   video it was a great holiday even though it's been 
a while ago thanks for watching don't forget to   hit that like button and don't forget to subscribe 
so you can see more of me see you next time|||Mielno Center The main promenade in Mielno Beach in Mielno - the Baltic Sea|||on the onset of Hitler's infamous politically campaign Poland bore the brunt and wrath of the entire German army despite a heroic an honorable defense Paulin had no chance of summing the seemingly never-ending tides of German manpower flooding their land and to make things even worse the British their primary allies at the time were too stunned to react at the time of Hitler's invasion in September of 1939 the Polish Navy consisted of four destroyers five submarines one mine layer and six mine sweepers as well as several other smaller and older auxilary boats with their base being located in an awkward position at Gdynia in the Gulf of donks as well as the Germans possessing a vastly superior Navy and Air Force a reluctant order was given to send around half of the Polish Navy to England for preservation including three destroyers this left an extremely small force to defend the home waters of Poland and in short order they were obliterated by the German bombers like five orphans however the submarines called vulture Wildcat Lynx wolf and Eagle had escaped their naval basic dinya after they'd been captured and were cast into a hostile world entirely on their own although still armed with torpedoes and the will to fight the protracted war the submarines were expecting never arrived due to the lack of naval activity in the baltic region the urge to fight was quickly replaced with the urge to survive and one by one they were each confronted with a final moment of truth in a 14-day period between September 11th and September the 25th two of the five submarines of vulture and Lynx were badly damaged and forced to limp to neutral Sweden and another one the Wildcat was forced to give up the fight and surrender as Warsaw had fallen the two submarines left floating in the depths of the baltic sea had no clue of the fate of the other submarines nor of poland's status sensing the end was near one of the submarines the wolf made the decision early to abandon the Baltic Sea and plot a course for England where they could link up with the free Polish Navy there the last submarine active the Eagle had perhaps the most interesting story of all after spending days avoiding German Luftwaffe patrols and German traps the Sun to lure them into revealing themselves their communications with the naval base academia was completely halted on the 12th of September on this same day the entire hydraulic system of the submarines collapsed and the commander of the submarine suffered a near-fatal illness now the votes executive officer lieutenant jeger sinski took over the home and took the submarine to the supposedly neutral Estonia for emergency repairs to place the commander in hospital under international law the palsy expected they would be allowed to remain in port and make repairs for a grace period of 24 hours although the Estonians are first appeared to agree with this sentiment when the Polish crew finished repairs long before the 24 hours expired the Estonians suddenly made them wait six hours for a German freighter to clear the water expecting to follow the freighter out the Estonians hit them with another surprise and under a new declaration they weren't allowed to leave and their ship was to be disassembled of anything that could be used as an instrument of war although the Estonians removed navigational instruments charts and vital components of the boats deck guns they had to wait till the next day to take away everything else including the torpedoes this left the poles with the whole night to conspire and they plotted their escape during the next day they sneakily sabotage it and observe the further dismantling of their ship until the next day they finally made something of their prior work snuck back on and took two armed guards as prisoners aboard the submarine with no harm done to either one although the submarine was now defunct of navigational equipments and charts the officers got together and draw up a homemade set of charts based on each man's best recollection they then also salvaged their radio where they heard of their country's sad fate their first port of call was to sail to neutral Sweden to drop off the two Estonians and lifeboats however the Polish men of the Eagle had no intention of being interned there and instead made the extremely dangerous and arduous journey to friendly England after navigating with the submarine with no navigational instruments through the dangerfoot Baltic and North Sea by mid-october the submarine miraculously made it to England where it could be restored to fight Germany once more and fight Germany it did becoming the first allied sub to sink a German ship taking part in the invasion of Norway Lieutenant Commander grazinsky was posthumously awarded Poland's highest military honour for his remarkable feat in guiding the sub to safety despite extremely unfavorable circumstances the eagle itself continued to fight well into the time of Hitler's invasion of France and the Low Countries until it was never heard from again and the entire crew was presumed lost by the Polish Navy in exile so guys that was just a little story on the Polish Navy and I hope enjoy that as I think the Navy are probably the more obscure part of World War two and least discuss part anyway so I'm glad to be covering them and I hope that you're glad to watch them as well and also guys if you're enjoying our content please do check out the patreon it really helps out anyways as always thank you for watching and I hope you learned something new [Music] [Music]|||yo what's up guys today we are reacting to 
Blanca this is from Poland chest yakshamash   let's go if you're new to the channel don't 
forget to like don't forget subscribe last   year Poland was amazing as well 
so let's check this one out Lanka I thought I knew but now it's time to face it this is definitely live sound you know when a song feels too 
live playing me dirty but now watch me bears it's a nice song I'm not gonna lie it's a nice   song but it doesn't feel 
like a professional singer I mean I can hear that she's a very 
good singer but there's something off am I the only one hearing it uh show you what it is okay um the honest opinion it did not feel like a 
final performance of the Eurovision I I felt her   voice was too raw or something I don't know if she 
was nervous I I just didn't connect with with her   voice in this one um I I can I can hear that she 
sings very well but it felt like a rehearsal to me   I don't know that's my opinion I don't know if I'm 
too critical today but I enjoyed the song actually   it it feels like um it's it's a pop song that 
could pick up it could you know be very successful   it's just that this performance I don't know 
there's something about it did you guys hear it   too or was it just me anyways I'll see you in 
the next video thank you for watching and hey   I'm I want to support Poland I I always do but if 
this is the final performance I don't think it's   gonna get too far I don't know I'm sorry guys I'll 
see you in the next video take care for now bye|||me so guys finally the restrictions uh have been 
lifted up in poland and we are allowed to go   to parks malls and we are allowed to go out but 
obviously it's partially it's not totally lifted   but then it's a sense of relief i'm sure you guys 
can understand that we are allowed to go out in   the parks without mask and you know it's it's such 
a relief i i should tell you guys and you know   poland is also recovering from covet and it's 
going great as of now a lot of friends and   family have asked us about you know what is the 
situation about vaccination in poland but then   yes i can say that you know registration for 18 
plus of age has been already started and even   foreigners are eligible to take their vaccines uh 
uh prior registration only but with that said guys   welcome back to the channel i hope you all are 
doing extremely fine and i cannot tell you guys   uh enough how exciting and how happy we are just 
to get vaccinated and you know so that the risk of   our life will be a little in a better situations 
and now that things are going very bad or rather   was in india i've been seeing pictures and videos 
and whatnot and you know it's it's really very sad   to hear all of it but then uh every single day i 
pray to god for you know speedy recovery off the   wall and uh just that everything gets very well 
soon and yes just hope for the best guys but i'm   sure you guys are totally safe and uh you guys 
are taking care of yourself but with all of it   guys let's just see what this video is gonna be 
about and uh i'm very much excited for this video   because a lot of people had been asking me about 
what are the different types of visas available   for poland so there are multiple types of visa and 
there are multiple type of uh questions and there   are a lot of confusions regarding what are which 
type of visa should they go for and what uh what   which type of visa is exactly for what purpose so 
this video is only going to be about the types of   visas that you will require to travel to poland 
so without wasting much time let's begin with the   video so for poland guys there are only three 
types of visas that's type a visa type c visa   and type d visa i'm going to explain each and 
every single visa in detail and i'm also going   to tell you what are the documents that you would 
require for applying all these types of visas it's   pretty simple and i'm sure this is going to be 
very helpful for you guys so let's just dive into   each type of visas that you would require for 
poland the first visa that we are going to talk   about now is a type a visa so guys type a visa 
is nothing but a transit visa which allows you to   travel through poland by that i mean you are 
allowed to only stay in the transit area and   neither you can exit the airport nor you can exit 
the transit area either okay so it's just limited   to transit area and you are allowed to stay in the 
transit area if you have type a visa and you want   to travel to another schengen country and this 
visa is only required for people traveling from   afghanistan bangladesh democratic republic of the 
congo ethopia gahana iraq iran nigeria pakistan   sudan and sri lanka so people traveling from 
these bunch of countries are only supposed to take   a transit visa otherwise if you are from any other 
country apart from the ones that i just listed you   are not allowed or rather you are not supposed 
to take any transit visa you can just uh travel   uh without any hassle so for me when i traveled 
from india to poland i traveled from india like   bombay from frankfurt that's germany to warsaw and 
i didn't did not require any sort of transit visa   although i was coming from a schengen country 
which is germany of course so i hope this is very   much clear to you guys and now let's see what 
exactly is a type c visa so the second type of   visa that we are going to see now is type c visa 
so basically type c visa is a short term visa most   of the time uh if you are a tourist or if you are 
uh traveling to poland for a short term business   trip or something only then uh it is required but 
type c visa is only valid for 90 days in a half of   a year that's it's only valid for 90 days in one 
out of 180 days so i am i hope this is not very   much confusing so you can only stay in poland 
for 90 days at a stretch in half a year you can   split your uh days off stay in poland according 
to your feasibility so for example if you want to   stay important for one month and uh you know like 
30 days in the first trip then another 30 days   in the second trip and another 30 days in uh the 
third trip but this has to be in half a year that   it should be in 180 days and not further than that 
it's a short-term visa where you are eligible to   travel to another schengen countries but that is 
also only limited to 90 days out of the 180 days   i hope this is very much clear also to add from my 
side you are not allowed to apply for trcs not for   work permit if you come on type c visa to poland i 
hope this is clear guys if you have any questions   feel free to drop them in the comment section 
below and with that said let's see what exactly is   type d visa and what will be the documents that 
you would require for all of these visas so guys   now it's the type d visa so type d visa is nothing 
but the national visa which is uh which allows you   to live in poland at a stretch for one year okay 
this is the best part and in poland you can apply   for your trc once the visa is about to expire or 
rather you can start applying for uh your trc well   in advance so that you know you do not get stuck 
in poland in case if you have to travel to your   country and you do not have a valid visa in that 
case if your visa has expired and you do not have   a trc card in your hand already then you will 
have to you will be eligible to fly back to your   country but then while returning back to poland 
you will have to apply for a fresh type d visa and   only then come to poland just because you have 
the stamp that you have you know submitted and   your application for trc has been uh in process 
you are not allowed to travel to poland without   having the car you need the trc card in your hand 
and only then you can travel back to poland and   yes that's like the biggest visa for poland that's 
type d and it's the national visa and for students   it's the same kind of visa it's the type d visa 
so basically they have type d visa and they have   multiple purposes of visa for which purpose are 
you going to travel so that purpose also gets   printed on your passport or rather you're on your 
visa so yes that is how it has been classified and   that is how it works in poland and talking about 
the documents that you required for all of these   visas first thing you always require a valid 
passport which has minimum 10 pages left in it   also you need uh the passport size photographs 
but then the passport size photographs are   the different in sizes they will mention on the 
application form of the visa which exactly is   the size of the photograph that you require then 
you need a an insurance which is uh which covers   you up to 30 000 euros yes that's a very huge 
amount but then the insurance does not cost you   a lot which is you know uh it's it's kind of 
affordable also so i'm sure that is manageable   and uh most important thing is the accommodation 
where you're going to stay your itinerary that's   your flight tickets and also uh the fees of these 
these types of visa that's the transit visa type   c visa and type d visa will not exceed than 70 
euros as of now okay it can be less but it's   not more than 70 euros but then that is as of now 
i'm not sure of what it would be in future but yes   these are the basic documents that you required 
i have also made a video on the checklist of vfs   which is required for your documents and for your 
visa application i'll link it on the i button and   you guys make sure if you want to watch that video 
also uh it will be very convenient for you to   understand what are the documents exactly that 
you required for a visa application for poland   and with that said guys this is it for the 
video i hope it was informative for you and   it was helpful for you in a way and if it was 
make sure to give it a big fat thumbs up and do   subscribe to my channel if you haven't done it yet 
it is free of cost and i put in a lot of efforts   to gather all this information for you and put it 
up here so please be kind enough and do subscribe   to my channel and i will see you guys in 
the next one until then you guys take care   bye bye stay safe and take care of yourself take 
care of your loved ones and everyone around you you|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Another difference in comparison with sole trader is that this company is Registered in national court register is a big thing sole proprietorship Is registered in a simple setting register, but and let's see is registered in court That's why the registration process takes a little bit longer and requires more documentation the tax number NIP as well as statistical number REGON are also Assigned to the company by default you will get them automatically and you don't need apply for them in case of LLC The company itself is a tax payer So your assets your taxes and your liabilities are separated from the company Which is a separate being in this case LLC can have to raise of taxes 19% which is for most of the companies this is for 2019 and it can also have 9% This is for the companies whose revenues do not exceed 1.2 million euros gross annual what is important is that LLC is always subject to full accounting on the contrary Sole proprietorship could have simplified accounting and more advanced accounting only when the revenues exceed a threshold In case a policy is always advanced accounting to summarize LLC is more recommended to more advanced businesses for the people who already know what to do Have some knowledge experience and are not afraid to burn some costs Because this company raises the cost of registration of initial capital Raises the cost of lawyer which would repair the documents of registration and also an accountant who will have to deliver certain statements for instance VAT statement Even if this is zero amount and the company does not have any income to sum up I would recommend this form for the people who are more experienced with business or Want to change from sole proprietorship because the company is developing|||Привіт, хлопці! Як ви? Добре! З відки ви? З ІндіЇ Як довго ви знаходитеся в Польщі? Три місяці Як ви знайшли цю агенцію? Мій друг розповідав про цю агенцію, і тоді я приїхав Ви раді співпрацювати з ними? Так Добре, хлопці, а де ви будете працювати? В якій фірмі? В ''K-flex'' Ви раді що приїхали сюди і починаєте працювати з нами? Так? Так так, ми дуже щасливі Також нам тут комфортно Скільки осіб вас приїхало сюди на данний момент? Шість осіб Ага, шестеро, а де двоє решта? Вони вже приступили до роботи, а ми ще чекаємо на дозвіл на роботу . Як ви бачите тут своє проживання? Що є біля вас в межах досяжності?Супермаркети чи артеки? Це не до порівняння з Індією, дуже все  по різному Ми йдемо в магазин і купуємо їжу І це зручно? Так це дуже зручно Персонал там дуже добрий і також доброзичливі люди Які у вас житлові умови? У нас добрі умови Чи у вас є безкоштовний вайфай? Так, є вайфай, газ і ми раді за це Хлопаки, як ви прихали сюди з Індії? Яка була процедура? Ми подавалися на польську візу І це зайняло 6 місяців щоб її отримати Я приїхав у Польщу Перше я шукав роботу в місті  Вроцлав(Роко) Це в Індії? Ні у Польщі, Роко сіті Ми не отримали  роботу ( чекали 2 місяці) і тоді мій друг порекомендував цю агенцію праці Це дуже добра агенція Вони дружні Тобто ви щасливі щодо подальшої співпраці Добре, дякую Як ви почуваєтеся у Польщі? Чи добрі тут люди? Так, добрі люди, добрий клімат Ви не боялися холодної погоди? Вперше як я сюди потрапив, то так, але вже звик, мені комфортно у цьому кліматі І того, бажаю вам добрих умов, доброї праці і всього найкащого Дякуємо!|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Legendia and Energylandia are the two 
most prominent theme parks in Poland.   Legendia is located in downtown Chorzow near 
Katowice and it is one of the country’s oldest   parks, opening in 1956 as Slaskie Wesole 
Miasteczko. However, this park has undergone   a massive transformation in recent years. The 
park has invested more in themed experiences   and this shift is what triggered the 
park’s name change to Legendia in 2017.   So is the park worth visiting today? 
Find out in this review of Legendia.
  Few parks that have been around as long as 
Legendia have had such a seismic shift in   just a few seasons. Prior to 2000, 
Legendia had barely any attractions   and zero roller coasters. In the 1.5 decades 
that followed Legendia started adding more rides.   Many of these attractions were 
portable or relocated attractions.   While they dramatically improved the quantity of 
the park’s offerings, the quality felt more like   a permanent carnival than a true theme park.
Then in the past 5 years, Legendia has elevated   their game. Their new additions have been 
accompanied by nice landscaping and small themed   areas to boost the overall atmosphere and ambiance 
of the park. And the park went one step further.   They started renovating their prior attractions 
giving them new names, paint schemes, and theming   to better tie in with the park. This facelift was 
so severe that it triggered this Polish park to   change their name from Slaskie Wesole Miasteczko 
to Legendia. And the name change was earned.
  The only weird thing remaining is that the park 
has several standing but not operating attractions   at the park such as the Scary Toys Factory roller 
coaster and the crazy Circus Hoppola flat ride.
  Not only does much of the park feel fresh between 
the new additions and renovations, but it looks   beautiful as a whole. I love how the park is set 
around a central lagoon. It creates some awesome   vantage points, particularly of Lech Coaster 
and the massive Legendia Flower ferris wheel.   And then you have the kinetic energy of the city 
along the outskirts of the part. Not only do you   have the usual hustle and bustle, but you 
also have some unique attractions nearby   like the city skyride and a massive 295 foot 
or 90 meter tall bungee jumping experience   where you’re jump from atop a construction 
crane. The latter was particularly captivating   whenever you saw someone ride to the top.
But back to Legendia, admission in 2021 cost   me the equivalent of 26 USD when I purchased it 
online in advance. That was a very good price   for a park as beautiful at Legendia that also 
has an elite coaster like Lech Coaster. I also   splurged for the park’s Fastpass skip-the-line 
ticket since it was only an additional $12 USD.
  I visited on a beautiful summer Sunday and most 
rides were walk-ons. In fact, the lack of crowds   was an issue on my early rides on Lech Coaster. 
The crew would deliberately hold back the train   for 10-15 minutes waiting for additional riders. 
A few other rides did this as well. If a ride   had a full trainload of people waiting, the crew 
would load and dispatch trains fairly quickly.
  The Fastpass came most in handy for Lech 
Coaster once that coaster built a steady   15-20 minute wait. I was able to basically 
board every other train for Lech Coaster.
  It also came in handy for the low-capacity 
Dream Hunters Society roller coaster,   which had a steady half hour wait 
all day, and the water rides,   which had posted 30-60 minute 
waits due to the warm weather.
  One other operational note is that Legendia 
has delayed openings for some rides   and early closures for others. The park 
had a sign at the end of Main Street   informing all guests which rides were affected, 
so be sure to check this when you visit.
  Moving onto the ride lineup, Legendia currently 
has 3 operating roller coasters. The fourth in   Scary Toys Factory has been closed for the 
past two years. And this zyklon coaster   was also closed for a year straight from late 
2018 through mid-2019 before that. But it’s   a really redundant attraction, considering Dream 
Hunters Society is a near-identical zkylon coaster   on the opposite side of the park. This is the 
park’s tamest roller coaster. It is surprising   Legendia no longer has a true kiddie coaster, but 
Dream Hunters Society is a fairly mild experience   for families. The two drops have a little zip 
and the rest of the ride is pretty slow. And   it’s quite funny to see the operators manually 
have to push the cars out of the station unlike   most coasters that are fully automated nowadays.
Diabelska Petla or Devil’s Loop is a Soquet double   looper with a history of relocations. The ride 
has two forceful vertical loops reminiscent of   those on Schwarzkopfs, but the rest of the ride 
is relatively dull. That final helix is super slow   and doesn’t offer any positive Gs or laterals. 
This coaster has a very simple layout,   but the ride interestingly has two backwards 
facing seats towards the back of train. The   two loops are extra disorienting in those seats 
for reasons I go into in a separate review.
  Lech Coaster is the undeniable star at Legendia 
for any coaster enthusiast and thrill-seeker.   The first and only Vekoma Bermuda Blitz 
coaster represents everything right with   Vekoma’s newest roller coasters. This attraction 
has incredible pacing, perfect transitions,   and awesome elements. This coaster is 
one of the most intense in the world.   There are two sections where I experienced 
extended greyouts rivaling those on   Intmidator 305 each ride plus a few shorter 
spurts where I started to lose my vision.   And then for variety, the coaster also mixes in 
several moments of airtime. You have several bunny   hills plus one of the best first drops of any 
coaster. This twisting, beyond-vertical plunge   offers a crazy combination of ejector airtime 
and strong laterals. This coaster is amazing   and I go into more detail in a separate review.
For flat rides, Legendia has a very interesting   collection. There is a solid mix of pendulum 
rides and spinning rides for all ages. There’s   a dedicated kiddie area plus a decent assortment 
of family and thrill rides around the lake.
  I was bummed to see Circus Hoppola in closed, but 
the park had another shockingly good pendulum ride   on the opposite side of the park. Skyflyer is a 
Vekoma kamikaze ride and if you love hangtime,   this is the ride for you. This inverting 
pendulum operates with just lap bars   and it boasts a ridiculously long cycle 
that clocked in between 6 and 7 minutes.   The ride didn’t offer any positive Gs on the 
downswing, but it offered countless inversions   with top-notch hangtime, especially when you 
paused upside-down at a few points. You may just   want to hold onto your lap bar or else it will 
keep lowering throughout the long experience.
  Another cool thrill ride was Cyclodrome. 
This is a self-operated inverting bicycle.   You strap yourself in and have to vigorously 
and rhythmically pedal. It required a good   amount of effort and technique, but it was 
very rewarding to finally get that inversion.   And you also get rewarded with a little 
hangtime. Just beware the kickback of   the pedals when you’re traveling in reverse 
or slowing down. As you see in the video,   I had to lift my feet up to avoid getting pelted.
Then there are two classics worth experiencing.   Dream Flight Airlines is a flying machine that 
is the final original attraction at the park.   The ride itself isn’t particularly 
thrilling; it’s just rare and historical.   Then you have the Legendia Flower Ferris Wheel, 
which stands 131 feet or 40 meters tall, so it   offers great views of the park and nearby city.
To beat the heat, you have two water rides.   Diamond River has the layout of a log flume, 
but the larger boats of a shoot the chute ride,   so this one can get you soaked. Then you have 
Dolina Jagi, which is a very well-landscaped   Hafema river rapids ride. This one is pretty 
tame. It doesn’t have any drops or whirlpools.   You just have a few mild rapids and a few extra 
water effects that aren’t timed well enough   to do anything more than a dribble.
Finally, you also have a dark ride in Bazyliszek.   This screen based shooter reminds me of the 
Justice League dark rides found at the Six Flags   parks. You have to shoot at a bunch of little 
characters that are analogous to Lexbots. There   are also some 2D physical sets, but many of the 
physical targets were broken during my visit.
  The other weird thing with this dark ride 
is that it’s located inside a building   with a food court. And on that note, 
I did have a meal at Legendia.
  I went to the burger restaurant near Diamond 
River and it pretty good. It was juicy   and bigger than expected.
So do I recommend Legendia? I think   Energylandia is the best park in Poland because of 
the quantity and quality of offerings there, but   Legendia is still a solid park. It has a quainter, 
more relaxed feel with something for everyone.   And Lech Coaster is a world-class roller 
coaster that would fit in at any thrill park.   You could easily spend a full-day at this park 
reriding things, but it’s possible to experience   Legendia’s signature rides in a half day.
So those are my thoughts on Legendia, the fun   amusement park in Poland. What are your thoughts 
on this park? Have you been there? I would love   to hear your thoughts about this Polish park down 
in the comments. If you enjoyed this review, I’d   appreciate it if you gave this video a like and 
you considered subscribing since there will be a   lot more roller coaster and amusement park videos 
here at Canobie Coaster. Thanks for watching!|||in this video we have given that PS is 
equal to SR and angle QSP is 45 degree   and angle QPS is equal to angle RQS that 
is X then we have to find the value of X so in triangle PQR and triangle QSR, angle R is 
common and angle X is equal   that means triangle PQR will 
be similar to Triangle QSR so PQ by QS will be equal to PR 
by QR will be equal to QR by SR so we have PR by QR is equal to QR by SR and PR is equal to PS plus SR and PS is 
equal to SR plus SR that is 2 times SR so PR is 2 times ST by QR is equal to QR by 
SR and if we cross multiply then 2 times SR   times SR will be equal to QR times QR and 
it is 2SR square is equal to QR square and QR square by SR square will be equal to 
2 and QR by SR will be equal to root 2 so QR by SR it is root 2 that 
means PQ by QS it is root 2 we get PQ by QS is equal to root 2 and this is the triangle and if we draw a perpendicular from Q then in triangle suppose this is M so QSM sine 45 degree will be equal to QM by QS   and sine 45 is 1 by root 2 so QS 
will be equal to root 2 times QM and here we can get PQ is equal to root 
2 times QS and PQ is equal to root 2   times QS is root 2 QM and it is 2 times QM and now in triangle QPM sine X will be equal to QM by PQ and sine X is equal to QM by PQ is 2 times QM   so sine X is equal to 1 by 2 that 
means X is equal to 30 degree and second method this is the triangle and QS by PS will be equal to QS 
by SR because PS is equal to SR and according to sine rule in any triangle ABC and side length is a, small b, small c   then sinA by a is equal to 
sinB by b is equal to sinC by c so sinA by a is equal to sinB by b so 
b by a will be equal to sinB by sinA that means ratio of side length is 
equal to ratio of opposite angle and this angle is 45 degree so this angle will 
be 135 degree and the sum of all angle in   a triangle is 180 so this angle will be 45 degree 
minus X and this angle will be 135 degree minus X so QS by PS will be equal to 
sine X by sine 135 degree minus X   it is sine X by sine 135 degree 
minus X is equal to and QS by SR   will be equal to sine 45 degree minus X by 
sine X it is sine 45 degree minus X by sine X and sine X times sine X is equal to sine 45 
degree minus X times sine 135 degree minus X and sine 135 degree minus X   it is equal to sine and 135 degree is 180 
degree minus 45 degree minus X and it is sine 180 degree minus 45 degree plus X and it 
will be equal to sine 45 degree plus X so sine X times sine X will be sine square 
X is equal to sine 45 degree minus X   times sine 135 degree minus 
X is sine 45 degree plus X and again sine A minus B times sine A plus B is 
equal to sine square A minus sine square B so sine square X will be equal to and sine 
45 degree minus X times sine 45 degree plus X   will be sine square 45 degree minus sin square X and 2 sine square X will be 
equal to sine square 45 degree   and 2 sine square X is equal to 
sine 45 is 1 by root 2 square so 2 sine square X is equal to 1 by 2 and 
sine square X is equal to 1 by 4 so sine X   will be equal to 1 by 2 that 
means X is equal to 30 degree.|||The will of Polish nobility is killing me. They're killing my love. Your Majesty. Forgive me, please. But I know that you are very smart.. and certainly you will do well. Come back to Wawel. Be brave. Wait patiently for your destiny. I lack strength, great-grandmother. - You were crying.
- I wasn't. Don't lie. You can't lie in a chapel. God is looking at you and he might punish you. I was crying. Do you think I'm stupid? That it's easy to deceive me? Nobody asks for your opinion. But you should. Queen Elizabeth, your mother accepted Grand Duke Jogaila's request for your hand. You have your knight. Forever. Your Majesty. I thought we would be together forever. I am ready. I need to go to Kraków. Not during autumn,
not during winter, now. Be watchful. Don't miss the signs which will guide you. They will remind you of people who had passed away. Jadwiga! Jadwiga! Jadwiga! What did I do to them that they torment me so much? We have alliance with Lithuania, Your Majesty! Do you want war? Be silent! You wanted a king no matter what so you have a king. Give me the key. (King) in a trap. But my reason.. says that William isn't for me. You're honest with me and I really appreciate it. Did you hear? I need to kill my love. They want Jogaila. I will suffer but I'll take Jogaila. Since Polish noblemen are in favour of him.. there's no going back. I'll carry my cross. Your Majesty. For God. Sir. And for Poland. Is there a place for me in your heart? My whole life I was raised to become
a wife of another man. I need time. You don't know my God. Will you be able to love Him like I do? Teach me. I'm not afraid. It's not like he will hurt me. I want to live in the truth, Jadwiga. And you? I am King, that's right. But I want to get married as a woman. You are the wisest woman I've ever met. You're looking into the past, it's not right. It's a letter. To William. A goodbye letter. You won't make a step ahead if you're looking back. I'm sending you sister.. my deepest condolences. I know how close you were with Queen Mother. Even at the moment of her death. Jadwiga is smart. She can do many things. Your place is in Kraków, Your Majesty. Kraków? City of loyal subjects. Don't start a war with Poland. We are family. You can't agree to taking our lands. You can't divide my kingdom. Pope is not in favour of who King
chose for ecclesian positions. You see? I have to do everything myself. Stand by King's side now
like you used to stand by my side. King is weaker without you. The kingdom is weaker. You can count on us, Your Majesty. She bore him children, I am King. Like a warrior. Sometimes more like a man than a woman. Isn't this more difficult? I don't know any other woman like you. Queen Jadwiga.. isn't going to stop your suffering. She won't say no to her husband's will. After all she's a woman. Enough! But I don't believe these are your worlds. 
I don't believe you don't understand. I didn't try to contact the Prince. "The Wilhelm thing" is over. Can I trust you? You can, King. Fate won't be kind to your Queen. Are you sure or afraid of that? This is what's written in the stars. And they don't lie. In July 1399..|||good morning peoples here from Poland in Białystok
still lovely Białystok as we've seen i'm back at Petter's motorcycle shop here where
yesterday uh we've ordered some new rear rubber because it was needed it might seem all right
for some others wil say no it was done ages ago i could still put some more on there there's
a bit of cupping but uh once the water comes look at this beauty how are you doing man
very good so i see that the tire has uh do you like it yeah i already like it man so
you want me to put the bike inside this side though yeah sweet okay with the motorbike
okay okay I'm going to grab the motorcycle, good day
ok good day he also speaks some Dutch you work a lot on Transalps in Poland yeah
beautiful so this time around uh we can take it easy and take the time to re-tape the rim
the reason why last time we had a leak was because of rim rot here at the rim now some
would say you got to change the rim there's something to say for that but on Alp I have
the same but worse actually and i've had it for years and i put it through some brutal
stuff and it's still there but on Alp i already taped it around once completely so it's not
an issue anymore so this is the duct tape that i brought along
always bring along duct tape be gentle Pavel I don't know how the younger generation don't
speak it anymore yours they learned Russian still and it was normal before you could come
to Poland and speak Russian but not now the younger generation now speaks English yes normally they learn in English and German
in middle high school we had German French and English yes yeah I did not like German
awful i hated it it was my least favorite you know I can't tell you why I don't like
German oh yeah i bet those are the best stories you can get some unsubscribes from Germany i don't know because it's nice to find common
ground between different kind of cultures oh so nice but you know what i like i also
like the drama between the countries neighbors always talk bad about each other you know
all over the world yeah it's the same good morning big boss bonjour small boss ah don't
sell yourself short Peter Mitas are hard tires right Metzeller is the worst yeah it's very hard
but I changed it very nice it needed some extra extra lube you know well it's gonna be a lot because there is
a rim lock yeah so let's have a look I almost never do this Pavel so this is like bonus
exactly if it's racing sure if you go very fast 200 per hour it's 140 wheel of fortune what will Pavel and Bernardo
have done let's find out now go good go let's go let's go i love new rubber man it's a beautiful thing
he made these exhaust header pipes he must be crazy what are you gonna do with that my man i knew
the polish were damn crazy but this is too much man okay i go to my other job hey my pleasure
man thank you take care chop some wood not for wood but for his wife alright we got some fresh rubber on there
here we go yeah and avoid the busy road with the trucks and whatnot cool nice quiet and
then here you can cross the border to this main road yeah and uh you said that in Lithuania
watch out for the police because they like to watch speed yeah and in civilian cars even
even old BMW's yeah you never think about that it could be police yeah so and even they
hide it you know thanks for everything no problem the great work man the good time the
coffee and tea Pavel take it easy good luck with the building of the house if you are
nearby maybe stop by for coffee thanks man fresh rubber Mitas e07 plus oh i can lose
my finger in there nice so now we got to watch it like the first 100km although it's not
as bad as it used to be from what i understood and in my experience too it's not as serious
as it used to be you know these tires come out of the factory a lot less slippery nowadays
but anyway enough talking let's get going okay let's keep going let's get going all
right you want to chill a little longer no hop on on all right ladies and gentlemen let's
go to Lithuania ah the tire sticks it sticks nice to meet you good luck with the riding
man Atlas is always pulling spectators has nothing
to do with me or me it's all Atlas you got a pack of ponies here very nice ones
too beauty wow look at this beautiful pine forest this
is the road that Peter recommended close to the Belarusian border along the lakes into
Lithuania this is great these old roads more military units over there they're all
staying at the hotels there's heaps of military really big trucks here in this region non-stop
on the border with Belarus plotted a route across a small border crossing route and it
takes us on some unsealed road nice further give that uh e07 Dakar plus a bit of a test
eh but this is what it should be made for the border is right here folks let's ride along the Polish Lithuanian border i can feel the Lithuanian air oh oh oh oh
oh welcome to Lithuania also known as Lithuania yep got some Poland
got some Lithuania yes i don't know if it's yes in Lithuanian might have to relearn everything
once again and i just got into animals and food in Duolingo in Polish this really is the lake district this part
of the Baltics southern Lithuania i don't know like most of it just looks like more
lake than uh land probably how the Netherlands used to be glaciers back in the day i really
dug into the place it seems for real now crossing the borer another country a new one that i haven't been
to yet another one on the Baltic experience list and a bit of unsealed fun through the
beautiful countryside here continues in Lithuania ah this is all a man needs in life oh the fuel is so expensive here again inflation
i'm considering uh to stay uh more than a few days out here you know in a nice natural
environment and where i can also get some work done for a few days ah look at this it's like apartments in the
forest uh hello speak uh pedro mota from booking.com
we just arrived in town and we are in front of the uh apartment well apparently there
has been a mix-up and this place already has been rented out somehow they offered an alternative
for tonight we'll see then what happens after that but we got something for the night at
least for a friendlier price we got the sorry you got involved in a mix-up price there we are almost home sweet home long overdue yesterday
the apartment didn't go down so we ended up here they sorted us out with a different place
which is very nice for a mishap price but they also offered us the place upstairs we
had with a balcony let's go have a look this little corner is actually really nice as you
see and the fact that you sit here in between the trees it's also very nice but this is
the place they offered also for the little mix-up and it starts off right away with the
lower floor very complete kitchen with a dishwasher it's got a lady good to have a lady in the kitchen and then
there's an upstairs too this is the master bedroom and this is the guest bedroom here we can
invite friends from Europe all they have to do is drive about a thousand eleven hundred
kilometers it's not much and then the cool part here is welcome down uh ma'am lady the rooftop terrace you see how it sits here
in between the trees so and this is for uh the same friendly rate of 30 euros that we
were paying downstairs to be honest out here it actually looks like it has become a how
do they say it in Dutch a blessing in disguise maybe it's too cold for taking a swim in the
lake oh damn it is coming right the good weather yeah so i was calling it the lake district
but i think all of Lithuania is the lake district sort of no yes and no Druskininkai sits in a good place because
it has a lake in the center of the city we can also swim there's a beach and there are
several lakes around here but mostly there are lakes up in the north but this is perfect
here for us that's my husband yeah and yesterday i heard your name like
five times so oh snap yeah it was quite the topic you know oh no why is Pedro here but this has been great on the gravel road
how did you like riding on the gravel road uh huh it was a bit bumpy wasn't it someone
became slightly more grabby oh wow thank you so much thank you wow oh this is a big skewer what
you call this shashlik it was delicious been doing your Lithuanian
research because good morning is abbas but the l might be silent abbas let's go to the gym so here in Druskininkai
there are no gyms we'll have to figure something out here at the local spa resort oh yeah very good yep we got weights we got all the
machines in the world we got plates hell yeah not this time Arny but another place another
time this was the Aqua gym sessions in Druskininkai ended up spending about 20 euros all together
five euro per session so four times it was good best gym until now i think gym of champions
I got these at the supermarket real quick some of the chop chop because you're going
to need heaps of garlic shut up you do you even have more garlic here comes the good stuff they love this sort
of thing and we can top it up with a little bit of lemon squeezy baby here we go there we go say hello to my little friends hmmmmmm bliss now i'm ready to crash after leg day|||um hey hungry could you please be so kind to me and stop becoming dictatorships it would be nice if you stick to our rules|||welcome to the channel my name is Rob what's 
up in today's video we are going back to 1982   with a Polish comedy that represents what 
it was like in a restaurant in communist times it's the noise what the why is said chains on the cutlery 
is it so I I'm going to guess because   it's it was Communist times they don't 
want things being stolen that's my only   guess uh it seems a little bit drastic 
doesn't it to to chain things together Channel [Music] CH what the I'm going to assume that this is over the 
top slightly but the lady has literally screwed   the plate into the table so it can't I 
should so it can't be taken away what   am I what surely if you were around during 
communist times was it really like this in   one of these canteen style restaurants 
because this seems completely bizarre   to me now and as you know as I've never 
lived in communist times okay right let's continue oh delightful oh 
she said that was [Music] sarcasm no don't mess with [Music] him up God God I it's it's a comedy and I always say the 
best comedies relate to real life and and are   taking inspiration from what really happens now 
this is going to be my interpretation of it okay   in communist times it was all meant to be everyone 
gets the same right that's the whole principle of   it roughly which isn't true because the the 
the big wigs and the leaders still get more   than everything else and in this situation the 
biggest baddest scariest person they take what   they want uh and they get away with it because 
the little people don't stand a chance and well   actually that sounds like capitalist to be fair 
um I I don't know how true to life this really   is but were Cutler and plates screwed down and 
chained down to the table so people couldn't   take them away this must have got some this must 
be slightly accurate surely but this was all the   way back in 1982 but this guy you wouldn't want 
to mess with him the food looked disgusting but I   bet it was quite cheap um just I I don't even know 
what to make of it to be honest this is a it's not   very pleasant to watch now knowing that maybe life 
was like this uh in Poland during communist times   and that's just awful to think this goes from 
being a comedy to to thinking oh what an awful   situation Polish people had and actually people 
still have uh in communist countries let me know   your thoughts on this one uh how accurate is this 
to real life during communist times thank you so   much for watching that was a short but sweet 
once again make sure you do like and subscribe Papa|||﻿Beautiful historic cities and 
UNESCO World Heritage sites.
  A modern bustling Metropole, hip nightlife, a 
tumultuous and extremely interesting history,   great cultural offerings, lovely Seaside 
towns, exciting affordable ski resorts,   wild rugged, and untouched nature, 
friendly and Incredibly resilient people,   great food, and a very decent cost of living. 
All that while being in Central Europe and the   European Union. Poland has always had a huge spot 
in my heart: my grandmother is from the beautiful   Seaside town of Gdansk, many of my high school 
friends, as well as my high school sweetheart,   my first meaningful relationship, whom I dated for 
seven years, were from Poland, and over the years   I have visited this beautiful country several 
times, both the Capital, the beautiful bustling   Metropol of Warsaw or Warszawa as the Poles call, 
the medieval town of Krakow, and some rural,   really cute off the Beaten Track Villages.
Amongst Digital Nomads Poland might not   be that popular yet, but it should be. 
It is inexpensive, modern, has a great Digital   Nomad infrastructure, and a lot of interesting 
things to do and discover. So let's dive into   Poland as a Digital Nomad destination and see what 
it has on offer. We will cover things like General   travel information, Digital Nomad Infrastructure 
such as Internet and accommodation offerings,   cost of living, where to make your digital home 
base, interesting things to do in your free time,   and of course Visa offerings - short 
and long stay for Digital Nomads.
  As always, you will find timestamps to the 
different chapters, as well as links to the   activities that I mentioned and other Digital 
Nomad resources down below in the description box.   Without further Ado, let's 
get right into Poland.
  Poland, officially called the Republic of Poland 
is a country in Central Europe. Poland has a   population of 38 million people and is the fifth 
most populous member state of the European Union.   It borders the Baltic Sea, the Kaliningrad Oblast 
which is a Russian semi-exclave outside of Russia,   Lithuania, Belarus, Ukraine, Slovakia, 
the Czech Republic, and Germany.   The language spoken here is Polish. English is 
spoken by the younger generation but not the   older one. They however are usually able to speak 
German or Russian. Poland is part of the European   Union but does not have the Euro yet. Instead, 
its currency is the Polish Zloty with one US   dollar currently equaling 0.24 Zloty. The weather 
in Poland is Continental: Summers will be hot and   Winters will be cold and snowy. As I've mentioned, 
in my opinion, Poland is hugely underrated. It has   so much on offer: from small sleepy Villages that 
seem as if time had stood still, to the bustling,   ever-developing Metropol of Warsaw. From 
the white sandy beaches of the Baltic Sea,   that invite for a swim during summer and 
freeze over during winter, to the lush green   forests and the Tatra Mountains. As well as the 
beautiful ski resort and ski slopes of Zakopane.   And all of that for a very decent price. Not 
to mention the ever-present reminders of the   tumultuous European history of just a few decades 
ago. But of course, to be a fantastic digital   Nomad destination, a country does not only have to 
be interesting, it also needs some infrastructural   requirements. So let's take a look at them to make 
sure that you can work productively here. First   and foremost, as always internet. Free Wi-Fi is 
available almost anywhere in Poland, particularly   in the bigger cities. It doesn't matter if 
you're in a restaurant, a museum, or a mall.   Speed wise Poland ranks 31st in terms of broadband 
speed with 107.26 megabits per second download   speed and 38.18 upload. Mobile internet speed 
ranks 45th with 48.71 megabits per second download   speed and 10.30 megabits per second upload speed. 
When it comes to actual infrastructure, Poland is   an easy country to both get to, as well as travel 
around in. The biggest International Airport is   Warsaw International, but if you are already in 
Europe you might also be arriving by bus or train.   Since Poland joined the EU, the union has heavily 
invested in modernizing Polish infrastructure,   which makes traveling around the country quite 
convenient. In the bigger cities like Warsaw you   will also find a modern and inexpensive public 
transport system, including buses and trams and,   in Warsaw also a Subway. when it comes to 
accommodation options you will find a lot of   choice with something for every taste no matter if 
you wish to stay in a fancy hotel a modern Airbnb   a cozy wooden Lodge or a social hostel you will 
be able to find just the right fit for you and   probably at a relatively decent price which brings 
us right to cost of living Poland is one of the   most affordable countries in the European Union 
particularly when it comes to buying food you   will be able to find a tasty local meal for just 
a couple of dollars a tip if you're on a budget   food wise is to visit one of the soviet-style 
cafeterias called milk bars where you can choose   out of a wide variety of local dishes and be 
served over the counter out of a big pot don't be   fooled by the No Frills approach of these places 
they are hugely popular amongst the locals and   the food is filling it's a decent sized portion 
it's very tasty and it's inexpensive but let's get   into cost of living numbers as always my numbers 
come from nubio because nubio is a crowdsourced   inexpensive platform and are translated to US 
dollars because I believe that the dollar is a   more relatable currency for everyone around the 
world a family A4 is estimated to pay 2143 US   dollars per month without rent a single person is 
estimated to pay 652 US dollars per month without   rent let's take a closer look at that shall we 
an inexpensive meal in a restaurant will cost you   approximately 8.46 a cappuccino will cost you 2.89 
a monthly transport pass will cost you around 26   US dollars if you are staying in one of the bigger 
cities that I am recommending like Warsaw you will   have a very very modern public transport system 
with buses trams and in the case of Warsaw also   a Subway which means that you probably won't have 
to pay much more than that for transportation taxi   starting cost comes at 1.93 a one kilometer taxi 
ride will cost you 73 cents and basic utilities   for an apartment of about 85 square meters for a 
month will cost you around 200 33 US Dollars and   75 cents internet for the month would cost you 14 
dollars and seven cents a month and a one bedroom   apartment in the city center would cost you around 
638 US dollars a one bedroom apartment outside of   the city center on the other hand would cost you 
about 524 US Dollars and this brings us to the   question of where to stay which city to make your 
home base Poland is a huge and diverse country and   if you want to experience as much of its diversity 
as possible it might make sense to spend some time   in each of these cities and use them as a starting 
point for smaller Adventures while still having   the digital Nomad infrastructure in place to 
work productively in between excursions
  well I guess I almost always start with a 
capital and Poland's Capital Warsaw is such an   incredibly interesting place to start it is a huge 
Metropole and a perfect mirror of Polish culture   and identity Warsaw was completely destroyed 
by the Nazis during World War II yet the inner   core of the city has been painstakingly rebuilt 
to its original glory and is just gorgeous
  surrounding it are some gigantous Soviet buildings 
reminders of Poland series behind the Iron Curtain   as well as hyper Modern Glass and steel 
skyscrapers that represent the young and   modern identity of Poland's younger 
generation here you will find all the   infrastructure you need to work productively 
free Wi-Fi fast internet co-working spaces a   big expat Community as well as plenty to 
do and discover in your free time
  world-class museums moving reminders 
of the country's tumultuous history   Michelin star restaurants Cheap authentic 
eateries buzzing nightlife and hip bars   on that note you might want to know that drinking 
in public if not purchased in a bar or restaurant   as well as being overly drunk in public is illegal 
in Poland but that's just as a side note Orso is   also conveniently located in the center of Poland 
with excellent connections to the rest of the   country making it a perfect starting point for any 
of the other sites I will cover in this video
  so what to do and see in Warsaw well let's start 
with the old town if you're a sucker for details   warsaw's Old Town technically isn't that old 
since as I mentioned it had to be completely   rebuilt after World War II while I've heard some 
complaining that this makes it less authentic and   just a tourist trap I could not disagree more 
and honestly find that thought rather ignorant   warsaw's old town is beautiful with 
colorful houses cobblestone streets   and a gorgeous Castle as well as some 
remainders of the old city fortifications   it is a UNESCO world heritage site and has been 
rebuilt to its former glory it can't be a Disney   tourist trap because this is how it looked before 
it got destroyed right here in this place instead   as so much in Poland I consider it to be both a 
window to the past and a glorious sign of Polish   resilience strength and determination to preserve 
their cultural heritage instead of just giving up   and rolling over if you are into classical music 
you might want to visit the Holy Cross church   hear the heart of the famous composer Chopin 
is preserved in a jar of alcohol and buried   Chopin originally polish and apparently longing 
for his homeland all his life of which he spent   the majority of in France made the request 
that his heart was to be cut out and buried   in Poland upon his death his older sister 
ludwika fulfilled her brother's dying wish   and secretly removed his heart shortly 
after his passing hiding it in a jar   of booze under her cloak and smuggling 
it to Poland the Warsaw Rising Museum   now even if you're not that much of a museum 
person this is one of the two things you must   do in Poland to understand the remarkable Polish 
people in my opinion the other one would be the   Concentration Camp of Auschwitz birkenau so let's 
take a short but important history detour here   that will help you understand the significance 
of many of the sites mentioned in this video   on September 1st 1939 Nazi Germany invaded 
Poland thus marking the beginning of World War II   Germany was aided by the Soviet Union and Slovakia 
and the initial fighting lasted from September 1st   of 1939 to October the 6th of the same year after 
which Germany and the Soviet Union divided Poland   amongst themselves both occupiers but particularly 
Nazi Germany raid with Terror in the country   Poland had before The Invasion been the country in 
Europe with the highest amount of Jewish citizens   three million or 10 of the population by the end 
of World War II around 380 000 were left
  impressively Poland never stopped resisting with 
the Warsaw Uprising in August 1944 being a huge   effort of resistance this Uprising should not be 
confused with the uprising in the Warsaw Ghetto a   year earlier another impressive feat you should 
research further while here but back to Warsaw   uprising the Warsaw Uprising was a major Act of 
resistance by the Polish underground in an effort   to free Warsaw from German occupation it was 
the single largest military effort taken by any   European resistance movement during World War II 
and went on for 63 days the Warsaw Rising Museum   commemorates this time in a gripping educational 
and awe-inspiring exhibition to get the most out   of the experience I strongly recommend an audio 
guide if not even a guided tour here the museum   is a little outside the city center but can be 
reached by bus and of course bike taxi or Uber   in the Center of Warsaw on Krasinski square and 
right in front of the Polish Supreme Court you   will also find a very impressive Monument 
commemorating the Warsaw uprising and then   there are the reminders of the Warsaw Ghetto the 
largest Nazi constructed ghetto for Jews during   World War II which you might know about from 
movies like The Pianist conditions in the ghetto   were inhumane and to this day you can walk past 
several markers and landmarks commemorating it   here the Jewish population had their own Act of 
Uprising and defines a year before the Warsaw   uprising it was a final effort to stop the Nazis 
transporting the last remaining inhabitants of   the ghetto to concentration camps it was also the 
largest single Revolt by Jews during World War II   last but not least to get back to present-day 
Warsaw and for a fantastic photo opportunity   and view over the entire city head to 
the Palace of culture the ginormous   Soviet building Smackdown in town it has 
a viewing Terrace on the 30th floor and   nowhere else in the city will you be able to 
enjoy such a spectacular view of Warsaw
  the next Super popular city amongst tourists and 
expats alike is no doubt Krakow in the south of   the country Krakow was visited by over 2 million 
tourists every year and is an absolute Beauty   it is the only major city in Poland that 
survived World War II in its original   state thus allowing you to experience the 
preoccupation Poland on a whole different level   the vavel castle seat of the Polish Kings 
for centuries an impressive Lively Market   Square a beautiful Market Hall and the stunning 
craftsmanship in each and every building
  Krakow is a beautiful window to the Past 
yet even here in its Jewish District now   one of the hippest and liveliest areas in town 
history did not pass without leaving a mark   and this must be said for all of Krakow 
but the city might have stayed intact this   does not mean that its inhabitants did not 
suffer greatly under the occupation if you   are a devout Catholic you might like to know 
that one of the inhabitants of krakov at the   time of occupation was a man named Carol voitella 
later much better known as Pope Johannes Paul II   and as soon as you leave Krakow and drive just an 
hour westwards to the Polish border the evidence   of History could not be any more obvious at 
Auschwitz birkenau the world's biggest Nazi   concentration camp but let's step back a little 
before we get here why is it that karakov survived   in all its Glory but no other city did one of the 
reasons must have been that Krakow was chosen by   the Germans as their main administrative seat 
in Poland and thus did not get bombed
  today Krakow is a young and bustling 
City with an interesting nightlife and   bar culture thanks to its many universities and 
students you will have no problem communicating   in English here the internet is reliable 
the public transport inexpensive there are   plenty of things to do both when it comes to 
museums track of even houses and original Da   Vinci painting cultural activities 
or excursions outside of the city   Krakow is also a fantastic base from which 
to take trips to the tatras mountains
  in Krakow your first stop when discovering the 
beautiful city will probably be the beautiful old   town with its enormous Town Square stunning Saint 
Mary's Church The Majestic vavel Castle which used   to be the seat of the Polish Kings until the 16th 
century and is well worth a visit to see the rich   pre-World War II polish culture and lovingly 
painted buildings in the middle of the Town   Square here you will find the so-called cloth Hall 
an impressive renaissance building that used to be   krakow's main Trade Center these days the shops 
and offerings here are very touristy but going   anyways to Marvel at the beautiful architecture 
and soak up the Lively atmosphere Saint Mary's   Basilica is well worth entering as well it is 
famous for its jaw-dropping wooden Altarpiece   as well as the trumpet signal that is played from 
the top of the larger of its two towers the signal   stops mid-tune to commemorate a Watchman sounding 
the trumpet alarm in the 13th century when the   city was attacked he was shot in the throat 
with an arrow and thus stopped mid signal
  particularly popular amongst children 
and those of us that have preserved their   inner child is the statue of the mythical 
vavel dragon at the foot of the vowel Hill   it's a huge dragon statue that breathes fire every 
five minutes but the coolest feature is that the   visitors can make it breathe fire on Demand by 
sending a text message one of the hippest and   liveliest districts in town particularly to 
go out for some drinks is the Jewish District   which still gives an interesting view into the 
rich Jewish culture in Poland pre-World War II   the majority of Jews did not survive the 
occupation but many buildings are intact and stand   as silent guardians of Jewish history and culture 
one popular place to visit is Hebrew Cafe in an   old synagogue which partly survived you can sit 
here and enjoy a cold beverage while marveling at   the original structure and stunning rare frescoes 
I should mention that while a very popular spot   its existence is not uncontested in the Jewish 
Community with some calling it exploitation of   Jewish culture and Heritage so it is up to you to 
make up your mind whether you want to visit or not   if you have the time for some day or multi-day 
trips carco is a great starting point for some   very impressive ones first of all of course 
the Concentration Camp of auschwitzburg now   this might not be your funnest day trip but it 
is a very important one see the reason why I   am so passionate about introducing countries to 
you explaining travel is because I passionately   believe that it brings all of us closer together 
if done correctly it helps us understand different   culture and tradition it opens our mind and heart 
for other people's stories their bravery in their   tradition it helps us understand one another 
more builds Bridges and hopefully dispenses   with predators and fear and Auschwitz book now 
the world's largest Nazi concentration camp could   not be a more somber reminder of why it is so 
important that we understand each other even past   different cultures different languages different 
Religion different stories or how we look   and that is why I think everyone should go 
and visit here about 1.3 million people mostly   Jews were deported to Auschwitz and 1.1 million 
were killed here if you can afford it you should   strongly consider paying for a guide here who 
will put everything you'd see into context
  if after this deeply moving experience 
you would like your next trip to be more   uplifting one of Poland's most famous ski 
resorts at the foot of the tatras mountains   it's a beautiful village with wooden 
houses and great ski slopes in winter   but even if you don't visit during winter zakopane 
is the perfect starting point for hiking trips   into the impressive rugged tatra mountains part 
of the capathions take a day hike for example   has a really beautiful 16 kilometer hike going 
around it or hike multiple days surrounded by   Lush Greenery impressive rock formations diverse 
wildlife and breathe the fresh air camping in the   National Park is not allowed but there are 
mountain Huts you can book in advance
  for an absolutely awe-inspiring jaw-dropping 
blow your mind experience that you can easily   do as a day trip visit the UNESCO world heritage 
site of the Village Salt Mine which used to be   mined for salt until 2007. nowadays it offers a 
fantastic day trip activity from Krakow it reaches   a 300 meters of depth over nine levels and is a 
whole City Underground with chapels restaurants   a lake restrooms exhibitions and so much more 
heck they even have designated Wi-Fi spots   popular route is to take the so-called tourist 
route which takes you past the major attractions   on three of the nine levels bonus is that salt 
mines are widely known for their positive healing   effect of the respiratory tract so you're doing 
something for your health along the line the   third City suitable for digital Nomads and a 
great location if you wish to be by the sea is   Gdansk has a special place in my heart because 
it is the hometown of my late grandmother but   aside from that it is also just a stunning town 
by the coast of the Baltic Sea in Northern Poland   while much of it has been destroyed during World 
War II it has been beautifully restored showcasing   the former glory of this wealthy trade hub 
it has a decently sized expat community and   reliable digital Nomad infrastructure it offers 
plenty of things to do has great restaurants and   cultural activities and you have access to the 
Baltic Sea it's also a good starting point to   continue onwards to Northern Europe with ferries 
from its Port leaving for example to Finland
  are its beautifully restored Old Town that   so much in Poland was left in 
Rebels after World War II
  this is where you will find Saint Mary's Church 
one of the two largest brick churches in the   world climbing up its Tower will reward you 
with one of the best views of Gdansk
  from the dance it's only a 45 minute bus 
ride to the peninsula of Wester Plateau   where World War II started you can visit 
remainders of the barracks here as well as   a monument and the Museum of the second world 
war which has very touching exhibitions and   leftovers from the war as well as has won 
an architectural prize for the building   for a day trip to a less controversial 
site head to malborg Castle the world's   biggest castle measured by surface area and 
previously home to the Titanic order
  and then of course when it comes to outdoor 
activities we can't forget about the seaside   Cadance is part of a so-called Tri-City together 
with the beautiful seaside resort of sopot   characterized by its endless sandy beaches and 
buzzing light life and Europe's largest wooden   pier and the smaller sleepier small town 
of Virginia spent some time by the beach   looking for Amber or just relaxing enjoy some 
water sports or bathing or in Winter Marvel at   the fascinating site of the Baltic Sea freezing 
over and just enjoy a day by the water last but   not least the city I would like to recommend 
as a digital Nomad base is Rose love
  it's a small but beautiful city for those of you 
who enjoy a bit more of the quieter life since   a lot of international companies have their seat 
here you will still find a sizable expat Community   to connect with it has a beautiful old town and 
is known for its many waterways and bridges
  so well I hope that this gave you a taste of the 
beautiful Poland its Treasures its history its   nature its people and everything else there is 
so much more I would like to show you like the   different national parks with biowowitza national 
park being home to the last wild advisons the   European bison that once used to roam so many 
of our European forests the Crooked Forest the   painted Village of zelipe but there's only so 
much one can fit into a YouTube video and I hope   that you decide to visit Poland and spend enough 
time there to discover all its beautiful sights   for yourself so let's move on to the Visa options 
bad news first at the moment Poland does not have   a digital Nomad Visa however it does have a long 
stay freelance Visa that many of you could qualify   for I will get to how you can apply for that as 
soon as we've covered the Short Stay option the   tourist visa if you want to stay in Poland for 90 
days or less a tourist visa is the general option   keep in mind that technically officially even 
though many digital Nomads have done so for   well probably decades by now you are not allowed 
to work on a digital on a tourist visa Poland is   part of the Schengen Zone and as such you 
would have to get a tourist Schengen visa   by the way if you would like to know more about 
how the Schengen Zone works and so on check out   this video up here generally what you need to 
know is that in order to travel to Poland on a   tourist visa you would have to get a Schengen visa 
should you need a visa that is which would allow   you to travel for 90 out of 180 days in the entire 
Schengen region these here are the countries who   need to apply for Schengen visa and cannot get 
an entry stamp or VISA upon arrival if you're   a citizen of one of these countries you will 
have to apply for a Schengen visa which you do   at the closest Schengen or Polish Consulate keep 
in mind that even if you are allowed to enter the   Schengen Zone visa-free as of 2024 you will have 
to register through the ATS service ATS stands   for European travel information authorization 
system and in the near future probably from   2024 will collect your data for security reasons 
so depending on when you watch this video make   sure to double check if you need to register 
even if you do not have a Visa that you need   to present all right let's move on to the long 
stay V7 by the way if you would like to know   how to stay in the Schengen zone for an extended 
period of time possibly indefinitely check out   this video up here otherwise as I said for Poland 
specifically there is a freelance visa and there   are several services online offering to assist 
with that if you feel that the process might feel   a little overwhelming but for now the basic steps 
are as follows you should earn approximately 800   US dollars a month and you need to apply for the 
freelance Visa via a consulate next you will need   to get some permits for which you will need your 
passport the first thing that you will have to get   is a pistol number which is kind of a personal 
identify number I guess like a social security   number this number you will then need to get a 
business bank account pay your taxes and take   part in health insurance you must also register at 
this central registry of information on economic   activity which will provide you with the following 
two numbers the first number is called Regan and   is a number a business identifier number that 
will place your business you as a freelancer   are basically your own one-person business so 
this will place you and your business in the   business registry of Poland next you will need a 
nip number the nip number is the tax identifier   number which you will need to pay business taxes 
in Poland the business tax rate is approximately   19 and basically that's it now if this really is 
something that is interesting to you I recommend   that you get help from an agency mainly because 
all these numbers and you know all the working to   and from different authorities hoping that they 
will be able to speak English and be able to   provide you with the paperwork in English might be 
a little bit overwhelming generally my opinion is   this is a good option for you if you for whatever 
personal reason or choosing want to really stay in   Poland for an extended amount of time the thing 
that I personally find so beautiful with digital   Nomad visas on the other hand is that they're 
relatively hassle-free meaning that it's kind   of a cookie cutter concept you know I mean 
you kind of always need the same paperwork to   all countries that offer digital Nomad Visa 
yeah the income requirement might you know vary   a little bit and one might want a criminal record 
the other doesn't but anyways generally you always   need the same paperwork so once you've done it 
once or twice you kind of should get a hang of   it and if that isn't the case then I guess you 
have several options you can take the Schengen   visa and move to Poland for 90 days and then 
leave the Schengen zone or hop in and out of   the Schengen Zone every 90 out of 180 days if you 
feel that you would like to come to Poland more   often or you just pick a digital Nomad Visa of one 
of the indigenous Med visas in the Schengen region   and then use that to frequently come and visit 
Poland with that said that's it for today check   out my other videos about the Schengen visas and 
Schengen digital domain destinations and next week   we will move to one of the newest digital Nomads 
visas on the Block which is the digital Nomad visa   to Uruguay which by the way currently also is the 
easiest digital Nomad visa to get out there but   more information on that next week so stay tuned 
stay safe and I'll see you here again bye bye|||THIS WEEK MARKS ONE YEAR SINCE
THE THIS WEEK MARKS ONE YEAR SINCE
THE START THIS WEEK MARKS ONE YEAR SINCE
THE START OF THIS WEEK MARKS ONE YEAR SINCE
THE START OF RUSSIA'S THIS WEEK MARKS ONE YEAR SINCE
THE START OF RUSSIA'S WAR THIS WEEK MARKS ONE YEAR SINCE
THE START OF RUSSIA'S WAR IN THE START OF RUSSIA'S WAR IN THE START OF RUSSIA'S WAR IN
UKRAINE. THE START OF RUSSIA'S WAR IN
UKRAINE. AND THE START OF RUSSIA'S WAR IN
UKRAINE. AND THERE'S THE START OF RUSSIA'S WAR IN
UKRAINE. AND THERE'S NO THE START OF RUSSIA'S WAR IN
UKRAINE. AND THERE'S NO SIGN UKRAINE. AND THERE'S NO SIGN UKRAINE. AND THERE'S NO SIGN
OF UKRAINE. AND THERE'S NO SIGN
OF THE UKRAINE. AND THERE'S NO SIGN
OF THE CONFLICT UKRAINE. AND THERE'S NO SIGN
OF THE CONFLICT ENDING UKRAINE. AND THERE'S NO SIGN
OF THE CONFLICT ENDING IN UKRAINE. AND THERE'S NO SIGN
OF THE CONFLICT ENDING IN THE OF THE CONFLICT ENDING IN THE OF THE CONFLICT ENDING IN THE
NEAR OF THE CONFLICT ENDING IN THE
NEAR FUTURE. OF THE CONFLICT ENDING IN THE
NEAR FUTURE. THAT'S OF THE CONFLICT ENDING IN THE
NEAR FUTURE. THAT'S WHY OF THE CONFLICT ENDING IN THE
NEAR FUTURE. THAT'S WHY ONE NEAR FUTURE. THAT'S WHY ONE NEAR FUTURE. THAT'S WHY ONE
EAST NEAR FUTURE. THAT'S WHY ONE
EAST TEXAS' NEAR FUTURE. THAT'S WHY ONE
EAST TEXAS' FAMILY NEAR FUTURE. THAT'S WHY ONE
EAST TEXAS' FAMILY IS EAST TEXAS' FAMILY IS EAST TEXAS' FAMILY IS
EMBARKING EAST TEXAS' FAMILY IS
EMBARKING ON EAST TEXAS' FAMILY IS
EMBARKING ON A EAST TEXAS' FAMILY IS
EMBARKING ON A LONG-TERM EMBARKING ON A LONG-TERM EMBARKING ON A LONG-TERM
MISSION EMBARKING ON A LONG-TERM
MISSION TO EMBARKING ON A LONG-TERM
MISSION TO SERVE EMBARKING ON A LONG-TERM
MISSION TO SERVE PEOPLE EMBARKING ON A LONG-TERM
MISSION TO SERVE PEOPLE IN MISSION TO SERVE PEOPLE IN MISSION TO SERVE PEOPLE IN
THAT MISSION TO SERVE PEOPLE IN
THAT PART MISSION TO SERVE PEOPLE IN
THAT PART OF MISSION TO SERVE PEOPLE IN
THAT PART OF THE MISSION TO SERVE PEOPLE IN
THAT PART OF THE WORLD. THAT PART OF THE WORLD. THAT PART OF THE WORLD.
LANE THAT PART OF THE WORLD.
LANE LUCKIE THAT PART OF THE WORLD.
LANE LUCKIE SHARES THAT PART OF THE WORLD.
LANE LUCKIE SHARES THEIR LANE LUCKIE SHARES THEIR LANE LUCKIE SHARES THEIR
JOURNEY... LANE LUCKIE SHARES THEIR
JOURNEY... IN LANE LUCKIE SHARES THEIR
JOURNEY... IN TONIGHT'S LANE LUCKIE SHARES THEIR
JOURNEY... IN TONIGHT'S POWER JOURNEY... IN TONIGHT'S POWER JOURNEY... IN TONIGHT'S POWER
OF JOURNEY... IN TONIGHT'S POWER
OF PRAYER. OF PRAYER. OF PRAYER.
IN OF PRAYER.
IN A OF PRAYER.
IN A MATTER OF PRAYER.
IN A MATTER OF OF PRAYER.
IN A MATTER OF WEEKS... OF PRAYER.
IN A MATTER OF WEEKS... THE IN A MATTER OF WEEKS... THE IN A MATTER OF WEEKS... THE
MCCLUNG IN A MATTER OF WEEKS... THE
MCCLUNG FAMILY IN A MATTER OF WEEKS... THE
MCCLUNG FAMILY WILL IN A MATTER OF WEEKS... THE
MCCLUNG FAMILY WILL TRADE MCCLUNG FAMILY WILL TRADE MCCLUNG FAMILY WILL TRADE
THESE MCCLUNG FAMILY WILL TRADE
THESE FAMILIAR MCCLUNG FAMILY WILL TRADE
THESE FAMILIAR VIEWS MCCLUNG FAMILY WILL TRADE
THESE FAMILIAR VIEWS OF MCCLUNG FAMILY WILL TRADE
THESE FAMILIAR VIEWS OF THE THESE FAMILIAR VIEWS OF THE THESE FAMILIAR VIEWS OF THE
SPRAWLING THESE FAMILIAR VIEWS OF THE
SPRAWLING YWAM THESE FAMILIAR VIEWS OF THE
SPRAWLING YWAM RANCH THESE FAMILIAR VIEWS OF THE
SPRAWLING YWAM RANCH IN SPRAWLING YWAM RANCH IN SPRAWLING YWAM RANCH IN
LINDALE... SPRAWLING YWAM RANCH IN
LINDALE... FOR SPRAWLING YWAM RANCH IN
LINDALE... FOR THIS. SPRAWLING YWAM RANCH IN
LINDALE... FOR THIS. SOUTHERN LINDALE... FOR THIS. SOUTHERN LINDALE... FOR THIS. SOUTHERN
POLAND LINDALE... FOR THIS. SOUTHERN
POLAND IS LINDALE... FOR THIS. SOUTHERN
POLAND IS ABOUT LINDALE... FOR THIS. SOUTHERN
POLAND IS ABOUT TO LINDALE... FOR THIS. SOUTHERN
POLAND IS ABOUT TO BECOME POLAND IS ABOUT TO BECOME POLAND IS ABOUT TO BECOME
HOME. POLAND IS ABOUT TO BECOME
HOME. JOSH POLAND IS ABOUT TO BECOME
HOME. JOSH MCCLUNG POLAND IS ABOUT TO BECOME
HOME. JOSH MCCLUNG "GOD POLAND IS ABOUT TO BECOME
HOME. JOSH MCCLUNG "GOD HAS HOME. JOSH MCCLUNG "GOD HAS HOME. JOSH MCCLUNG "GOD HAS
REALLY HOME. JOSH MCCLUNG "GOD HAS
REALLY PROVIDED HOME. JOSH MCCLUNG "GOD HAS
REALLY PROVIDED FOR HOME. JOSH MCCLUNG "GOD HAS
REALLY PROVIDED FOR SO HOME. JOSH MCCLUNG "GOD HAS
REALLY PROVIDED FOR SO MANY HOME. JOSH MCCLUNG "GOD HAS
REALLY PROVIDED FOR SO MANY OF REALLY PROVIDED FOR SO MANY OF REALLY PROVIDED FOR SO MANY OF
OUR REALLY PROVIDED FOR SO MANY OF
OUR NEEDS REALLY PROVIDED FOR SO MANY OF
OUR NEEDS AND REALLY PROVIDED FOR SO MANY OF
OUR NEEDS AND REALLY REALLY PROVIDED FOR SO MANY OF
OUR NEEDS AND REALLY SET REALLY PROVIDED FOR SO MANY OF
OUR NEEDS AND REALLY SET A OUR NEEDS AND REALLY SET A OUR NEEDS AND REALLY SET A
PLACE OUR NEEDS AND REALLY SET A
PLACE FOR OUR NEEDS AND REALLY SET A
PLACE FOR US OUR NEEDS AND REALLY SET A
PLACE FOR US THERE." OUR NEEDS AND REALLY SET A
PLACE FOR US THERE." JOSH, PLACE FOR US THERE." JOSH, PLACE FOR US THERE." JOSH,
MEG, PLACE FOR US THERE." JOSH,
MEG, AND PLACE FOR US THERE." JOSH,
MEG, AND THEIR PLACE FOR US THERE." JOSH,
MEG, AND THEIR TWO PLACE FOR US THERE." JOSH,
MEG, AND THEIR TWO KIDS PLACE FOR US THERE." JOSH,
MEG, AND THEIR TWO KIDS HAVE MEG, AND THEIR TWO KIDS HAVE MEG, AND THEIR TWO KIDS HAVE
SPENT MEG, AND THEIR TWO KIDS HAVE
SPENT THREE MEG, AND THEIR TWO KIDS HAVE
SPENT THREE YEARS MEG, AND THEIR TWO KIDS HAVE
SPENT THREE YEARS AT MEG, AND THEIR TWO KIDS HAVE
SPENT THREE YEARS AT "YOUTH SPENT THREE YEARS AT "YOUTH SPENT THREE YEARS AT "YOUTH
WITH SPENT THREE YEARS AT "YOUTH
WITH A SPENT THREE YEARS AT "YOUTH
WITH A MISSION'S' SPENT THREE YEARS AT "YOUTH
WITH A MISSION'S' TRAINING SPENT THREE YEARS AT "YOUTH
WITH A MISSION'S' TRAINING AND WITH A MISSION'S' TRAINING AND LORD LORD SAY, LORD SAY, 'JUST LORD SAY, 'JUST COMMIT LORD SAY, 'JUST COMMIT AND LORD SAY, 'JUST COMMIT AND
WATCH LORD SAY, 'JUST COMMIT AND
WATCH WHAT LORD SAY, 'JUST COMMIT AND
WATCH WHAT I'LL LORD SAY, 'JUST COMMIT AND
WATCH WHAT I'LL DO.' LORD SAY, 'JUST COMMIT AND
WATCH WHAT I'LL DO.' AND LORD SAY, 'JUST COMMIT AND
WATCH WHAT I'LL DO.' AND I LORD SAY, 'JUST COMMIT AND
WATCH WHAT I'LL DO.' AND I WAS WATCH WHAT I'LL DO.' AND I WAS WATCH WHAT I'LL DO.' AND I WAS
LIKE, WATCH WHAT I'LL DO.' AND I WAS
LIKE, OH WATCH WHAT I'LL DO.' AND I WAS
LIKE, OH GOSH, WATCH WHAT I'LL DO.' AND I WAS
LIKE, OH GOSH, I'VE WATCH WHAT I'LL DO.' AND I WAS
LIKE, OH GOSH, I'VE BEEN WATCH WHAT I'LL DO.' AND I WAS
LIKE, OH GOSH, I'VE BEEN LIKE LIKE, OH GOSH, I'VE BEEN LIKE LIKE, OH GOSH, I'VE BEEN LIKE
ASKING LIKE, OH GOSH, I'VE BEEN LIKE
ASKING HIM LIKE, OH GOSH, I'VE BEEN LIKE
ASKING HIM TO LIKE, OH GOSH, I'VE BEEN LIKE
ASKING HIM TO TAKE LIKE, OH GOSH, I'VE BEEN LIKE
ASKING HIM TO TAKE CARE LIKE, OH GOSH, I'VE BEEN LIKE
ASKING HIM TO TAKE CARE OF LIKE, OH GOSH, I'VE BEEN LIKE
ASKING HIM TO TAKE CARE OF ALL ASKING HIM TO TAKE CARE OF ALL ASKING HIM TO TAKE CARE OF ALL
THOSE ASKING HIM TO TAKE CARE OF ALL
THOSE THINGS ASKING HIM TO TAKE CARE OF ALL
THOSE THINGS BEFORE ASKING HIM TO TAKE CARE OF ALL
THOSE THINGS BEFORE I ASKING HIM TO TAKE CARE OF ALL
THOSE THINGS BEFORE I WOULD THOSE THINGS BEFORE I WOULD THOSE THINGS BEFORE I WOULD
GIVE THOSE THINGS BEFORE I WOULD
GIVE MY THOSE THINGS BEFORE I WOULD
GIVE MY YES. THOSE THINGS BEFORE I WOULD
GIVE MY YES. AND THOSE THINGS BEFORE I WOULD
GIVE MY YES. AND THAT'S THOSE THINGS BEFORE I WOULD
GIVE MY YES. AND THAT'S NOT GIVE MY YES. AND THAT'S NOT GIVE MY YES. AND THAT'S NOT
FAITH...." GIVE MY YES. AND THAT'S NOT
FAITH...." MULTIPLE GIVE MY YES. AND THAT'S NOT
FAITH...." MULTIPLE TRIPS GIVE MY YES. AND THAT'S NOT
FAITH...." MULTIPLE TRIPS TO FAITH...." MULTIPLE TRIPS TO FAITH...." MULTIPLE TRIPS TO
POLAND FAITH...." MULTIPLE TRIPS TO
POLAND AND FAITH...." MULTIPLE TRIPS TO
POLAND AND INTO FAITH...." MULTIPLE TRIPS TO
POLAND AND INTO UKRAINE FAITH...." MULTIPLE TRIPS TO
POLAND AND INTO UKRAINE HAVE POLAND AND INTO UKRAINE HAVE POLAND AND INTO UKRAINE HAVE
OPENED POLAND AND INTO UKRAINE HAVE
OPENED THEIR POLAND AND INTO UKRAINE HAVE
OPENED THEIR EYES POLAND AND INTO UKRAINE HAVE
OPENED THEIR EYES AND POLAND AND INTO UKRAINE HAVE
OPENED THEIR EYES AND HEARTS OPENED THEIR EYES AND HEARTS OPENED THEIR EYES AND HEARTS
TO OPENED THEIR EYES AND HEARTS
TO A OPENED THEIR EYES AND HEARTS
TO A DESPERATE OPENED THEIR EYES AND HEARTS
TO A DESPERATE SITUATION. OPENED THEIR EYES AND HEARTS
TO A DESPERATE SITUATION. JOSH TO A DESPERATE SITUATION. JOSH TO A DESPERATE SITUATION. JOSH
MCCLUNG TO A DESPERATE SITUATION. JOSH
MCCLUNG "PEOPLE TO A DESPERATE SITUATION. JOSH
MCCLUNG "PEOPLE HAD TO A DESPERATE SITUATION. JOSH
MCCLUNG "PEOPLE HAD THEIR TO A DESPERATE SITUATION. JOSH
MCCLUNG "PEOPLE HAD THEIR HOME MCCLUNG "PEOPLE HAD THEIR HOME MCCLUNG "PEOPLE HAD THEIR HOME
COMPLETELY MCCLUNG "PEOPLE HAD THEIR HOME
COMPLETELY DESTROYED, MCCLUNG "PEOPLE HAD THEIR HOME
COMPLETELY DESTROYED, BURNED COMPLETELY DESTROYED, BURNED COMPLETELY DESTROYED, BURNED
DOWN, COMPLETELY DESTROYED, BURNED
DOWN, BOMBED, COMPLETELY DESTROYED, BURNED
DOWN, BOMBED, AND COMPLETELY DESTROYED, BURNED
DOWN, BOMBED, AND NO COMPLETELY DESTROYED, BURNED
DOWN, BOMBED, AND NO LONGER DOWN, BOMBED, AND NO LONGER DOWN, BOMBED, AND NO LONGER
HAD DOWN, BOMBED, AND NO LONGER
HAD HEATING." DOWN, BOMBED, AND NO LONGER
HAD HEATING." THE DOWN, BOMBED, AND NO LONGER
HAD HEATING." THE MCCLUNGS DOWN, BOMBED, AND NO LONGER
HAD HEATING." THE MCCLUNGS ARE HAD HEATING." THE MCCLUNGS ARE HAD HEATING." THE MCCLUNGS ARE
BEING HAD HEATING." THE MCCLUNGS ARE
BEING LED HAD HEATING." THE MCCLUNGS ARE
BEING LED TO HAD HEATING." THE MCCLUNGS ARE
BEING LED TO THE HAD HEATING." THE MCCLUNGS ARE
BEING LED TO THE CITY HAD HEATING." THE MCCLUNGS ARE
BEING LED TO THE CITY OF BEING LED TO THE CITY OF BEING LED TO THE CITY OF
USTRON... BEING LED TO THE CITY OF
USTRON... WHERE BEING LED TO THE CITY OF
USTRON... WHERE LAST BEING LED TO THE CITY OF
USTRON... WHERE LAST YEAR, USTRON... WHERE LAST YEAR, USTRON... WHERE LAST YEAR,
THEY USTRON... WHERE LAST YEAR,
THEY HELPED USTRON... WHERE LAST YEAR,
THEY HELPED CONVERT USTRON... WHERE LAST YEAR,
THEY HELPED CONVERT THIS USTRON... WHERE LAST YEAR,
THEY HELPED CONVERT THIS HOTEL THEY HELPED CONVERT THIS HOTEL THEY HELPED CONVERT THIS HOTEL
INTO THEY HELPED CONVERT THIS HOTEL
INTO A THEY HELPED CONVERT THIS HOTEL
INTO A HOME THEY HELPED CONVERT THIS HOTEL
INTO A HOME FOR THEY HELPED CONVERT THIS HOTEL
INTO A HOME FOR REFUGEE INTO A HOME FOR REFUGEE INTO A HOME FOR REFUGEE
FAMILIES. INTO A HOME FOR REFUGEE
FAMILIES. THE INTO A HOME FOR REFUGEE
FAMILIES. THE NEED INTO A HOME FOR REFUGEE
FAMILIES. THE NEED IS INTO A HOME FOR REFUGEE
FAMILIES. THE NEED IS GREAT. FAMILIES. THE NEED IS GREAT. FAMILIES. THE NEED IS GREAT.
POLAND FAMILIES. THE NEED IS GREAT.
POLAND HAS FAMILIES. THE NEED IS GREAT.
POLAND HAS TAKEN FAMILIES. THE NEED IS GREAT.
POLAND HAS TAKEN IN FAMILIES. THE NEED IS GREAT.
POLAND HAS TAKEN IN MORE POLAND HAS TAKEN IN MORE POLAND HAS TAKEN IN MORE
UKRAINIANS POLAND HAS TAKEN IN MORE
UKRAINIANS THAN POLAND HAS TAKEN IN MORE
UKRAINIANS THAN ANY POLAND HAS TAKEN IN MORE
UKRAINIANS THAN ANY OTHER UKRAINIANS THAN ANY OTHER UKRAINIANS THAN ANY OTHER
COUNTRY. UKRAINIANS THAN ANY OTHER
COUNTRY. MEG UKRAINIANS THAN ANY OTHER
COUNTRY. MEG MCCLUNG UKRAINIANS THAN ANY OTHER
COUNTRY. MEG MCCLUNG "WHEN UKRAINIANS THAN ANY OTHER
COUNTRY. MEG MCCLUNG "WHEN WE COUNTRY. MEG MCCLUNG "WHEN WE COUNTRY. MEG MCCLUNG "WHEN WE
WOULD COUNTRY. MEG MCCLUNG "WHEN WE
WOULD ARRIVE COUNTRY. MEG MCCLUNG "WHEN WE
WOULD ARRIVE AT COUNTRY. MEG MCCLUNG "WHEN WE
WOULD ARRIVE AT THE COUNTRY. MEG MCCLUNG "WHEN WE
WOULD ARRIVE AT THE BUS WOULD ARRIVE AT THE BUS WOULD ARRIVE AT THE BUS
STATION WOULD ARRIVE AT THE BUS
STATION OR WOULD ARRIVE AT THE BUS
STATION OR MAYBE WOULD ARRIVE AT THE BUS
STATION OR MAYBE THE WOULD ARRIVE AT THE BUS
STATION OR MAYBE THE REFUGEE STATION OR MAYBE THE REFUGEE STATION OR MAYBE THE REFUGEE
CENTERS STATION OR MAYBE THE REFUGEE
CENTERS WHERE STATION OR MAYBE THE REFUGEE
CENTERS WHERE THERE STATION OR MAYBE THE REFUGEE
CENTERS WHERE THERE WERE STATION OR MAYBE THE REFUGEE
CENTERS WHERE THERE WERE A STATION OR MAYBE THE REFUGEE
CENTERS WHERE THERE WERE A LOT CENTERS WHERE THERE WERE A LOT CENTERS WHERE THERE WERE A LOT
OF CENTERS WHERE THERE WERE A LOT
OF PEOPLE CENTERS WHERE THERE WERE A LOT
OF PEOPLE IN CENTERS WHERE THERE WERE A LOT
OF PEOPLE IN ONE CENTERS WHERE THERE WERE A LOT
OF PEOPLE IN ONE PLACE, CENTERS WHERE THERE WERE A LOT
OF PEOPLE IN ONE PLACE, OFTEN OF PEOPLE IN ONE PLACE, OFTEN OF PEOPLE IN ONE PLACE, OFTEN
I OF PEOPLE IN ONE PLACE, OFTEN
I THINK OF PEOPLE IN ONE PLACE, OFTEN
I THINK THEY OF PEOPLE IN ONE PLACE, OFTEN
I THINK THEY FELT OF PEOPLE IN ONE PLACE, OFTEN
I THINK THEY FELT LIKE OF PEOPLE IN ONE PLACE, OFTEN
I THINK THEY FELT LIKE LIKE I THINK THEY FELT LIKE LIKE I THINK THEY FELT LIKE LIKE
JUST I THINK THEY FELT LIKE LIKE
JUST ONE I THINK THEY FELT LIKE LIKE
JUST ONE OF I THINK THEY FELT LIKE LIKE
JUST ONE OF A I THINK THEY FELT LIKE LIKE
JUST ONE OF A THOUSAND I THINK THEY FELT LIKE LIKE
JUST ONE OF A THOUSAND OR I THINK THEY FELT LIKE LIKE
JUST ONE OF A THOUSAND OR ONE JUST ONE OF A THOUSAND OR ONE JUST ONE OF A THOUSAND OR ONE
OF JUST ONE OF A THOUSAND OR ONE
OF MANY. JUST ONE OF A THOUSAND OR ONE
OF MANY. AND JUST ONE OF A THOUSAND OR ONE
OF MANY. AND NOT JUST ONE OF A THOUSAND OR ONE
OF MANY. AND NOT REALLY JUST ONE OF A THOUSAND OR ONE
OF MANY. AND NOT REALLY LIKE OF MANY. AND NOT REALLY LIKE OF MANY. AND NOT REALLY LIKE
AN OF MANY. AND NOT REALLY LIKE
AN INDIVIDUAL." OF MANY. AND NOT REALLY LIKE
AN INDIVIDUAL." UNDERSTANDING AN INDIVIDUAL." UNDERSTANDING AN INDIVIDUAL." UNDERSTANDING
THE AN INDIVIDUAL." UNDERSTANDING
THE NEEDS AN INDIVIDUAL." UNDERSTANDING
THE NEEDS OF AN INDIVIDUAL." UNDERSTANDING
THE NEEDS OF EACH AN INDIVIDUAL." UNDERSTANDING
THE NEEDS OF EACH PERSON... THE NEEDS OF EACH PERSON... THE NEEDS OF EACH PERSON...
INCORPORATES THE NEEDS OF EACH PERSON...
INCORPORATES THEIR THE NEEDS OF EACH PERSON...
INCORPORATES THEIR WHOLE INCORPORATES THEIR WHOLE INCORPORATES THEIR WHOLE
FAMILY. INCORPORATES THEIR WHOLE
FAMILY. OLIVER INCORPORATES THEIR WHOLE
FAMILY. OLIVER IS INCORPORATES THEIR WHOLE
FAMILY. OLIVER IS 9... INCORPORATES THEIR WHOLE
FAMILY. OLIVER IS 9... AND FAMILY. OLIVER IS 9... AND FAMILY. OLIVER IS 9... AND
RYMER FAMILY. OLIVER IS 9... AND
RYMER IS FAMILY. OLIVER IS 9... AND
RYMER IS 5. FAMILY. OLIVER IS 9... AND
RYMER IS 5. THEY FAMILY. OLIVER IS 9... AND
RYMER IS 5. THEY PLAY RYMER IS 5. THEY PLAY RYMER IS 5. THEY PLAY
IMPORTANT RYMER IS 5. THEY PLAY
IMPORTANT ROLES RYMER IS 5. THEY PLAY
IMPORTANT ROLES IN RYMER IS 5. THEY PLAY
IMPORTANT ROLES IN THIS IMPORTANT ROLES IN THIS IMPORTANT ROLES IN THIS
MINISTRY. IMPORTANT ROLES IN THIS
MINISTRY. MEG IMPORTANT ROLES IN THIS
MINISTRY. MEG MCCLUNG IMPORTANT ROLES IN THIS
MINISTRY. MEG MCCLUNG "AND MINISTRY. MEG MCCLUNG "AND MINISTRY. MEG MCCLUNG "AND
AGAIN, MINISTRY. MEG MCCLUNG "AND
AGAIN, WE MINISTRY. MEG MCCLUNG "AND
AGAIN, WE SAW MINISTRY. MEG MCCLUNG "AND
AGAIN, WE SAW OUR MINISTRY. MEG MCCLUNG "AND
AGAIN, WE SAW OUR CHILDREN AGAIN, WE SAW OUR CHILDREN AGAIN, WE SAW OUR CHILDREN
RELATING AGAIN, WE SAW OUR CHILDREN
RELATING TO AGAIN, WE SAW OUR CHILDREN
RELATING TO THE AGAIN, WE SAW OUR CHILDREN
RELATING TO THE KIDS AGAIN, WE SAW OUR CHILDREN
RELATING TO THE KIDS IN AGAIN, WE SAW OUR CHILDREN
RELATING TO THE KIDS IN A AGAIN, WE SAW OUR CHILDREN
RELATING TO THE KIDS IN A WAY RELATING TO THE KIDS IN A WAY RELATING TO THE KIDS IN A WAY
THAT RELATING TO THE KIDS IN A WAY
THAT WE RELATING TO THE KIDS IN A WAY
THAT WE WOULDN'T RELATING TO THE KIDS IN A WAY
THAT WE WOULDN'T BE RELATING TO THE KIDS IN A WAY
THAT WE WOULDN'T BE ABLE RELATING TO THE KIDS IN A WAY
THAT WE WOULDN'T BE ABLE TO. THAT WE WOULDN'T BE ABLE TO. THAT WE WOULDN'T BE ABLE TO.
AND THAT WE WOULDN'T BE ABLE TO.
AND THEY THAT WE WOULDN'T BE ABLE TO.
AND THEY JUST THAT WE WOULDN'T BE ABLE TO.
AND THEY JUST DON'T THAT WE WOULDN'T BE ABLE TO.
AND THEY JUST DON'T HAVE THAT WE WOULDN'T BE ABLE TO.
AND THEY JUST DON'T HAVE THE AND THEY JUST DON'T HAVE THE AND THEY JUST DON'T HAVE THE
SAME AND THEY JUST DON'T HAVE THE
SAME LANGUAGE AND THEY JUST DON'T HAVE THE
SAME LANGUAGE BARRIER. AND THEY JUST DON'T HAVE THE
SAME LANGUAGE BARRIER. LIKE, SAME LANGUAGE BARRIER. LIKE, SAME LANGUAGE BARRIER. LIKE,
PLAY SAME LANGUAGE BARRIER. LIKE,
PLAY IS SAME LANGUAGE BARRIER. LIKE,
PLAY IS AN SAME LANGUAGE BARRIER. LIKE,
PLAY IS AN INTERNATIONAL PLAY IS AN INTERNATIONAL PLAY IS AN INTERNATIONAL
LANGUAGE." PLAY IS AN INTERNATIONAL
LANGUAGE." ACROSS PLAY IS AN INTERNATIONAL
LANGUAGE." ACROSS BORDERS... LANGUAGE." ACROSS BORDERS... LANGUAGE." ACROSS BORDERS...
AND LANGUAGE." ACROSS BORDERS...
AND EVEN LANGUAGE." ACROSS BORDERS...
AND EVEN INTO LANGUAGE." ACROSS BORDERS...
AND EVEN INTO WAR LANGUAGE." ACROSS BORDERS...
AND EVEN INTO WAR ZONES... LANGUAGE." ACROSS BORDERS...
AND EVEN INTO WAR ZONES... THE AND EVEN INTO WAR ZONES... THE AND EVEN INTO WAR ZONES... THE
FAMILY AND EVEN INTO WAR ZONES... THE
FAMILY OF AND EVEN INTO WAR ZONES... THE
FAMILY OF FOUR AND EVEN INTO WAR ZONES... THE
FAMILY OF FOUR IS AND EVEN INTO WAR ZONES... THE
FAMILY OF FOUR IS DEDICATED AND EVEN INTO WAR ZONES... THE
FAMILY OF FOUR IS DEDICATED TO FAMILY OF FOUR IS DEDICATED TO FAMILY OF FOUR IS DEDICATED TO
SPREADING FAMILY OF FOUR IS DEDICATED TO
SPREADING HOPE. FAMILY OF FOUR IS DEDICATED TO
SPREADING HOPE. JOSH FAMILY OF FOUR IS DEDICATED TO
SPREADING HOPE. JOSH MCCLUNG SPREADING HOPE. JOSH MCCLUNG SPREADING HOPE. JOSH MCCLUNG
"AND SPREADING HOPE. JOSH MCCLUNG
"AND EVEN SPREADING HOPE. JOSH MCCLUNG
"AND EVEN THOUGH SPREADING HOPE. JOSH MCCLUNG
"AND EVEN THOUGH WE SPREADING HOPE. JOSH MCCLUNG
"AND EVEN THOUGH WE CAN'T "AND EVEN THOUGH WE CAN'T "AND EVEN THOUGH WE CAN'T
COMMUNICATE "AND EVEN THOUGH WE CAN'T
COMMUNICATE AND "AND EVEN THOUGH WE CAN'T
COMMUNICATE AND TELL "AND EVEN THOUGH WE CAN'T
COMMUNICATE AND TELL PEOPLE, COMMUNICATE AND TELL PEOPLE, COMMUNICATE AND TELL PEOPLE,
YOU COMMUNICATE AND TELL PEOPLE,
YOU KNOW, COMMUNICATE AND TELL PEOPLE,
YOU KNOW, THAT COMMUNICATE AND TELL PEOPLE,
YOU KNOW, THAT THIS COMMUNICATE AND TELL PEOPLE,
YOU KNOW, THAT THIS IS COMMUNICATE AND TELL PEOPLE,
YOU KNOW, THAT THIS IS GOD YOU KNOW, THAT THIS IS GOD YOU KNOW, THAT THIS IS GOD
THAT'S YOU KNOW, THAT THIS IS GOD
THAT'S DOING YOU KNOW, THAT THIS IS GOD
THAT'S DOING THIS YOU KNOW, THAT THIS IS GOD
THAT'S DOING THIS THROUGH YOU KNOW, THAT THIS IS GOD
THAT'S DOING THIS THROUGH US. THAT'S DOING THIS THROUGH US. THAT'S DOING THIS THROUGH US.
THEY THAT'S DOING THIS THROUGH US.
THEY CAN THAT'S DOING THIS THROUGH US.
THEY CAN SEE THAT'S DOING THIS THROUGH US.
THEY CAN SEE JUST THAT'S DOING THIS THROUGH US.
THEY CAN SEE JUST THROUGH THAT'S DOING THIS THROUGH US.
THEY CAN SEE JUST THROUGH OUR THEY CAN SEE JUST THROUGH OUR THEY CAN SEE JUST THROUGH OUR
ACTIONS THEY CAN SEE JUST THROUGH OUR
ACTIONS THAT THEY CAN SEE JUST THROUGH OUR
ACTIONS THAT WE THEY CAN SEE JUST THROUGH OUR
ACTIONS THAT WE DO THEY CAN SEE JUST THROUGH OUR
ACTIONS THAT WE DO LOVE THEY CAN SEE JUST THROUGH OUR
ACTIONS THAT WE DO LOVE AND ACTIONS THAT WE DO LOVE AND ACTIONS THAT WE DO LOVE AND
VALUE ACTIONS THAT WE DO LOVE AND
VALUE THEM." ACTIONS THAT WE DO LOVE AND
VALUE THEM." FROM ACTIONS THAT WE DO LOVE AND
VALUE THEM." FROM THIS ACTIONS THAT WE DO LOVE AND
VALUE THEM." FROM THIS BASE... VALUE THEM." FROM THIS BASE... VALUE THEM." FROM THIS BASE...
YWAM VALUE THEM." FROM THIS BASE...
YWAM AIMS VALUE THEM." FROM THIS BASE...
YWAM AIMS TO VALUE THEM." FROM THIS BASE...
YWAM AIMS TO FIND VALUE THEM." FROM THIS BASE...
YWAM AIMS TO FIND LONG-TERM YWAM AIMS TO FIND LONG-TERM YWAM AIMS TO FIND LONG-TERM
SOLUTIONS YWAM AIMS TO FIND LONG-TERM
SOLUTIONS FOR YWAM AIMS TO FIND LONG-TERM
SOLUTIONS FOR FAMILIES SOLUTIONS FOR FAMILIES SOLUTIONS FOR FAMILIES
PERMANENTLY SOLUTIONS FOR FAMILIES
PERMANENTLY ALTERED SOLUTIONS FOR FAMILIES
PERMANENTLY ALTERED BY PERMANENTLY ALTERED BY PERMANENTLY ALTERED BY
CONFLICT. PERMANENTLY ALTERED BY
CONFLICT. JOSH PERMANENTLY ALTERED BY
CONFLICT. JOSH MCCLUNG PERMANENTLY ALTERED BY
CONFLICT. JOSH MCCLUNG "SO PERMANENTLY ALTERED BY
CONFLICT. JOSH MCCLUNG "SO HOW CONFLICT. JOSH MCCLUNG "SO HOW CONFLICT. JOSH MCCLUNG "SO HOW
DO CONFLICT. JOSH MCCLUNG "SO HOW
DO YOU CONFLICT. JOSH MCCLUNG "SO HOW
DO YOU PROVIDE CONFLICT. JOSH MCCLUNG "SO HOW
DO YOU PROVIDE SOME CONFLICT. JOSH MCCLUNG "SO HOW
DO YOU PROVIDE SOME MINISTRY DO YOU PROVIDE SOME MINISTRY DO YOU PROVIDE SOME MINISTRY
THAT DO YOU PROVIDE SOME MINISTRY
THAT INVOLVES DO YOU PROVIDE SOME MINISTRY
THAT INVOLVES A DO YOU PROVIDE SOME MINISTRY
THAT INVOLVES A VERY DO YOU PROVIDE SOME MINISTRY
THAT INVOLVES A VERY HOLISTIC THAT INVOLVES A VERY HOLISTIC THAT INVOLVES A VERY HOLISTIC
APPROACH THAT INVOLVES A VERY HOLISTIC
APPROACH OF THAT INVOLVES A VERY HOLISTIC
APPROACH OF COUNSELING THAT INVOLVES A VERY HOLISTIC
APPROACH OF COUNSELING AND APPROACH OF COUNSELING AND APPROACH OF COUNSELING AND
TRAUMA APPROACH OF COUNSELING AND
TRAUMA HEALING APPROACH OF COUNSELING AND
TRAUMA HEALING AND APPROACH OF COUNSELING AND
TRAUMA HEALING AND PRAYER APPROACH OF COUNSELING AND
TRAUMA HEALING AND PRAYER AND TRAUMA HEALING AND PRAYER AND TRAUMA HEALING AND PRAYER AND
FINDING TRAUMA HEALING AND PRAYER AND
FINDING JUST TRAUMA HEALING AND PRAYER AND
FINDING JUST A TRAUMA HEALING AND PRAYER AND
FINDING JUST A JOB TRAUMA HEALING AND PRAYER AND
FINDING JUST A JOB AND TRAUMA HEALING AND PRAYER AND
FINDING JUST A JOB AND AN FINDING JUST A JOB AND AN FINDING JUST A JOB AND AN
OCCUPATION FINDING JUST A JOB AND AN
OCCUPATION AND FINDING JUST A JOB AND AN
OCCUPATION AND TEACHING OCCUPATION AND TEACHING OCCUPATION AND TEACHING
LANGUAGE OCCUPATION AND TEACHING
LANGUAGE SO OCCUPATION AND TEACHING
LANGUAGE SO THAT OCCUPATION AND TEACHING
LANGUAGE SO THAT THEY'RE OCCUPATION AND TEACHING
LANGUAGE SO THAT THEY'RE ABLE LANGUAGE SO THAT THEY'RE ABLE LANGUAGE SO THAT THEY'RE ABLE
TO LANGUAGE SO THAT THEY'RE ABLE
TO EXIST LANGUAGE SO THAT THEY'RE ABLE
TO EXIST IN LANGUAGE SO THAT THEY'RE ABLE
TO EXIST IN THE LANGUAGE SO THAT THEY'RE ABLE
TO EXIST IN THE COMMUNITY LANGUAGE SO THAT THEY'RE ABLE
TO EXIST IN THE COMMUNITY THAT TO EXIST IN THE COMMUNITY THAT TO EXIST IN THE COMMUNITY THAT
THEY'RE TO EXIST IN THE COMMUNITY THAT
THEY'RE IN." TO EXIST IN THE COMMUNITY THAT
THEY'RE IN." THIS TO EXIST IN THE COMMUNITY THAT
THEY'RE IN." THIS KIND TO EXIST IN THE COMMUNITY THAT
THEY'RE IN." THIS KIND OF THEY'RE IN." THIS KIND OF THEY'RE IN." THIS KIND OF
UNDERTAKING THEY'RE IN." THIS KIND OF
UNDERTAKING WILL THEY'RE IN." THIS KIND OF
UNDERTAKING WILL INVOLVE UNDERTAKING WILL INVOLVE UNDERTAKING WILL INVOLVE
TRAINING UNDERTAKING WILL INVOLVE
TRAINING OTHER UNDERTAKING WILL INVOLVE
TRAINING OTHER MISSIONARIES... TRAINING OTHER MISSIONARIES... TRAINING OTHER MISSIONARIES...
AND TRAINING OTHER MISSIONARIES...
AND PREPARING TRAINING OTHER MISSIONARIES...
AND PREPARING THEM TRAINING OTHER MISSIONARIES...
AND PREPARING THEM FOR AND PREPARING THEM FOR AND PREPARING THEM FOR
OUTREACH AND PREPARING THEM FOR
OUTREACH AND AND PREPARING THEM FOR
OUTREACH AND EVANGELISM AND PREPARING THEM FOR
OUTREACH AND EVANGELISM ACROSS OUTREACH AND EVANGELISM ACROSS OUTREACH AND EVANGELISM ACROSS
CENTRAL OUTREACH AND EVANGELISM ACROSS
CENTRAL EUROPE. OUTREACH AND EVANGELISM ACROSS
CENTRAL EUROPE. JOSH OUTREACH AND EVANGELISM ACROSS
CENTRAL EUROPE. JOSH MCCLUNG CENTRAL EUROPE. JOSH MCCLUNG CENTRAL EUROPE. JOSH MCCLUNG
"THERE'S CENTRAL EUROPE. JOSH MCCLUNG
"THERE'S NO CENTRAL EUROPE. JOSH MCCLUNG
"THERE'S NO FINISH CENTRAL EUROPE. JOSH MCCLUNG
"THERE'S NO FINISH TO CENTRAL EUROPE. JOSH MCCLUNG
"THERE'S NO FINISH TO THAT. CENTRAL EUROPE. JOSH MCCLUNG
"THERE'S NO FINISH TO THAT. WE "THERE'S NO FINISH TO THAT. WE "THERE'S NO FINISH TO THAT. WE
CONTINUE "THERE'S NO FINISH TO THAT. WE
CONTINUE TO "THERE'S NO FINISH TO THAT. WE
CONTINUE TO EVERY "THERE'S NO FINISH TO THAT. WE
CONTINUE TO EVERY DAY "THERE'S NO FINISH TO THAT. WE
CONTINUE TO EVERY DAY DISCOVER CONTINUE TO EVERY DAY DISCOVER CONTINUE TO EVERY DAY DISCOVER
NEW CONTINUE TO EVERY DAY DISCOVER
NEW THINGS CONTINUE TO EVERY DAY DISCOVER
NEW THINGS AND CONTINUE TO EVERY DAY DISCOVER
NEW THINGS AND DISCOVER CONTINUE TO EVERY DAY DISCOVER
NEW THINGS AND DISCOVER NEW NEW THINGS AND DISCOVER NEW NEW THINGS AND DISCOVER NEW
THINGS NEW THINGS AND DISCOVER NEW
THINGS ABOUT NEW THINGS AND DISCOVER NEW
THINGS ABOUT WHO NEW THINGS AND DISCOVER NEW
THINGS ABOUT WHO GOD NEW THINGS AND DISCOVER NEW
THINGS ABOUT WHO GOD CREATED THINGS ABOUT WHO GOD CREATED THINGS ABOUT WHO GOD CREATED
US THINGS ABOUT WHO GOD CREATED
US TO THINGS ABOUT WHO GOD CREATED
US TO BE. THINGS ABOUT WHO GOD CREATED
US TO BE. AND THINGS ABOUT WHO GOD CREATED
US TO BE. AND WHAT THINGS ABOUT WHO GOD CREATED
US TO BE. AND WHAT HE'S US TO BE. AND WHAT HE'S US TO BE. AND WHAT HE'S
CALLING US TO BE. AND WHAT HE'S
CALLING US US TO BE. AND WHAT HE'S
CALLING US INTO." US TO BE. AND WHAT HE'S
CALLING US INTO." JOSH US TO BE. AND WHAT HE'S
CALLING US INTO." JOSH SAYS CALLING US INTO." JOSH SAYS CALLING US INTO." JOSH SAYS
IT'S CALLING US INTO." JOSH SAYS
IT'S ALL CALLING US INTO." JOSH SAYS
IT'S ALL ABOUT CALLING US INTO." JOSH SAYS
IT'S ALL ABOUT SIMPLE CALLING US INTO." JOSH SAYS
IT'S ALL ABOUT SIMPLE STEPS CALLING US INTO." JOSH SAYS
IT'S ALL ABOUT SIMPLE STEPS OF IT'S ALL ABOUT SIMPLE STEPS OF IT'S ALL ABOUT SIMPLE STEPS OF
OBEDIENCE... IT'S ALL ABOUT SIMPLE STEPS OF
OBEDIENCE... GUIDED IT'S ALL ABOUT SIMPLE STEPS OF
OBEDIENCE... GUIDED BY IT'S ALL ABOUT SIMPLE STEPS OF
OBEDIENCE... GUIDED BY THE OBEDIENCE... GUIDED BY THE OBEDIENCE... GUIDED BY THE
POWER OBEDIENCE... GUIDED BY THE
POWER OF OBEDIENCE... GUIDED BY THE
POWER OF PRAYER. OBEDIENCE... GUIDED BY THE
POWER OF PRAYER. LANE OBEDIENCE... GUIDED BY THE
POWER OF PRAYER. LANE LUCKIE, POWER OF PRAYER. LANE LUCKIE, POWER OF PRAYER. LANE LUCKIE,
EAST POWER OF PRAYER. LANE LUCKIE,
EAST TEXAS POWER OF PRAYER. LANE LUCKIE,
EAST TEXAS NEWS. EAST TEXAS NEWS. EAST TEXAS NEWS.
THE EAST TEXAS NEWS.
THE MCCLUNGS EAST TEXAS NEWS.
THE MCCLUNGS WON'T EAST TEXAS NEWS.
THE MCCLUNGS WON'T BE EAST TEXAS NEWS.
THE MCCLUNGS WON'T BE ALONE THE MCCLUNGS WON'T BE ALONE THE MCCLUNGS WON'T BE ALONE
WHEN THE MCCLUNGS WON'T BE ALONE
WHEN THEY THE MCCLUNGS WON'T BE ALONE
WHEN THEY ARRIVE THE MCCLUNGS WON'T BE ALONE
WHEN THEY ARRIVE IN THE MCCLUNGS WON'T BE ALONE
WHEN THEY ARRIVE IN POLAND. WHEN THEY ARRIVE IN POLAND. WHEN THEY ARRIVE IN POLAND.
MEG'S WHEN THEY ARRIVE IN POLAND.
MEG'S SISTER WHEN THEY ARRIVE IN POLAND.
MEG'S SISTER AND MEG'S SISTER AND MEG'S SISTER AND
BROTHER-IN-LAW MEG'S SISTER AND
BROTHER-IN-LAW ARE MEG'S SISTER AND
BROTHER-IN-LAW ARE ALSO BROTHER-IN-LAW ARE ALSO BROTHER-IN-LAW ARE ALSO
INVOLVED BROTHER-IN-LAW ARE ALSO
INVOLVED IN BROTHER-IN-LAW ARE ALSO
INVOLVED IN FULL- BROTHER-IN-LAW ARE ALSO
INVOLVED IN FULL- TIME INVOLVED IN FULL- TIME INVOLVED IN FULL- TIME
MISSIONARY INVOLVED IN FULL- TIME
MISSIONARY WORK INVOLVED IN FULL- TIME
MISSIONARY WORK IN INVOLVED IN FULL- TIME
MISSIONARY WORK IN THE MISSIONARY WORK IN THE|||Anyone who interacts with unclean forces on a daily basis... Do the Queen's orders mean nothing anymore? It is the King who decides. King - man, he chooses officials. It has always been so. ...can be contaminated by them. My Queen? I do not see this growth, but the action of unclean forces! "Vita Activa" - and finally I can rule. Will you take the reigns yourself? What if the Queen wants to rule alone? That's what I've been striving for all along. He must be severely punished You will die in agony. It's mistake! Queen, I beg you! You didn't ask for my opinion. The crown has two sides - light and dark. I have to be a tyrant. It's dark magic! The radiance of the crown eats the soul and takes away the mind...|||- The news coming in just
as we come on the air tonight. NATO officials now saying
Russia has officially invaded Ukraine -Possibly a start to war. - The most dangerous time
as they've said over and over at the pentagon
since world war II. - Missiles and bombs
have been raining down on an entirely innocent population. -   Every Ukrainian not
fighting is looking for shelter or a way out. -   We're currently on a
train heading to Kraków where we have a bunch
of refugees on this train who some of them
have a place to go, some of them don't
have a place to go. So we are here ministering
[to] them, sharing the gospel praying for them,
giving out some baby carriers as well as some candy. - These are two families that
just came off the train station. They've been traveling
for three days from Kyiv, standing still at a place not
knowing where to go next; and we were led to them. We just had a moment
of encouraging them, had a chance to give
them a few necessities like baby carriers and
things that would help them. We're putting them up
here at a hotel for two nights so that they can just rest wrap their head around the
fact they're here over the border. We're helping them
figure out the next step where they're going to be staying so that they can start building a life. -   So we are in a church that's
called The Grace of Christ, right now. It's one of the small
churches that hosts refugees. And right now you
see the room behind me, This room in the church where
kids with parents are staying. It's kind of like a transition for them. They stay here for a couple of days and then they move
them to people's houses or they rent homes for them. [foreign language] People here they receive
them, they feed them they try their best. But I also
encourage every single person if you're moved in your
heart to help refugees please, they need a lot of help. They need food,
they need clothing, they need so much stuff. They come here they're
very tired, they're exhausted; exhausted moms with children. And so if you find it in
your heart please donate and we're going to
post the link below it's going to be pastorvlad.org/ukraine. and we will really appreciate that. Thank you.|||Hello, I'm Ken from Japan (Polish) This time... I uploaded a video of traveling to Gdansk and Lodz, actually I went to Warsaw before and after Lodz. To meet my friend. He's only the best friend. I stayed at the friend's house for a few days, and went to Lodz after that, I had enjoyable time It was the last time in Warsaw I really focused on hanging out with my friend too much, so I didn't shoot a video Although this video might not be rich in content, I would like to share a bit of my time in Warsaw. So, I moved from Gdansk to Warsaw, and when I arrived in Warsaw, it was already night. The bus was about an hour late. I caused my friend trouble, but when I got his home , I thought it was really kind of him to prepare pizza like this. It was an authentic pizza, and it was super delicious I don't know if it's just my friends, but I have an impression that Polish people often cook anything by themselves like sweets or pizza even though they take time They are good at cooking, maybe Next day... I ate out with my friend and his girlfriend I uploaded a video about eating Tatar just once Then, there were many comment like, "That's a different way of eating it," and "That's not the original Tatar." After my friend saw them, he took me to eat the real Tatar The real one was different It was so delious Also in Japan, we have yukke, which is similar to that, but the vegetables around it are different These vegetables have a rather strong sour taste, and they eat raw meat with it Tatar are usually eaten with bread This pierogi. The one on the top is something like fried bacon, and it was really delicious. Restaurant on the ship My friend's dog is so cute... I've really wanted to have a dog since I came to Poland Honestly, even if I can't get married in the future, I feel that if I have a dog or a cat, I can live somehow Only non-barking and quiet dogs, though Then, my friend prepared ”kotlet”, which I wanted to eat It's Polish pork cutlet It's like a restaurant. His family prepared it, maybe Polish people are really good at hospitality They might be a little cold to strangers but they welcome to relatives or friends warmly The purple one was unfamiliar to Japanese people, so I was a little worried but it's delicious, the texture is like between potato and seaweed. That was sweet and good (Friend) You don't eat beetroot in Japan?
(Ken) No. In Poland, the staple food is bread or potatoes. People often have potatoes with this kind of dish Anyway, this kotlet is... good... The difference from Japanese pork cutlet is that panko is used in it but kotlet is wheat? It's pretty soft on the skin, but there's a lot of meat inside There's no extra fat, no fatty mass unlike the Japanese one It's easier to eat more and more Sometimes, Japanese pork cutlet makes me sick Also, it does match potatoes Including this cuisine, I'm thankful of everything my friend and his family did I can't open my mouth despite my big body After this, I shot TikTok videos with my friend, so we're discussing it Discussing what to do. Please watch it Again, the difference between both cutlets are that Japanese pork cutlet is quite thick But kotlet is thin so it's easier to eat Right now, my friend said "If you want more, let me know." And I said "I'm fine, thanks." After all, I'll have one more That was super delicious Kotlet, it's one of my favorite Polish foods. Amazing Last Warsaw It's been five months. Nostalgic~ I'm back to this square. Last time I saw it, it was winter, so there was an ice skate rink in the center but it was removed, and it's back to what it was originally I again realized that Warsaw is awesome Beautiful. I was in love with it Unfortunately, I was there for about three days? but it rained for about 4 days and 3 days, so I didn't see much of the sights But at the end, I went up to the observatory, which I'm familiar with when I travel, and looked out over Warsaw This is where I often saw in the picture I wondered where it is taken Beautiful It's a little scary to look down from here By the way, I was satisfied with sightseeing in Warsaw. I felt a sense of security somehow It felt like my second home. After all, Warsaw is well organized Looks organized neatly. Well, there's almost everything Streets are beautiful, so Warsaw is a nice place to live in Lastly, this tower And I went to the shopping mall as usual Actually, I had lived in Warsaw for 5 months so I was a little bored at that time And I was spending the Polish winter, so I was a bit depressed. After the time, I've traveled in several cities for about 6 months And after I came back to Warsaw, I realized Warsaw is amazing There was an atmosphere that you can only find in Warsaw Modern and old-fashioned style Only Warsaw have the combination of them Anyway, I had great time My friend is so kind, and when I had trouble, he would help me As for kotlet, I didn't expect so much because I've heard it's similar to Japanese pork cutlet I thought "The Japanese one must be better." but it's delicious... It's more delicious than the Japanese one in normal shops So that's it. I didn't go sightseeing so much because it was raining At least I went to the observatory, and I made some good memories There's almost no time for me to stay in Poland but I'll go somewhere and eat something that I can until the last moment All right, thank you for watching. Have a nice day (Polish)|||TURKEY AND PIE AND THE MEN AND WOMEN IN SERVICE OVERSEAS ARE GATHERED CELEBRATING ALSO STATION AND POLL. WE WANT TO WELCOME IN FIRST LIEUTENANT COLIN YORK. SERGEANT AND PETTY OFFICER FIRST CLASS NOR JAVIER AGAIN AS HAPPY THANKSGIVING. YOU GUYS. AT HEY, WE UNDERSTAND THAT YOU ARE AWAY FROM YOUR FAMILIES TODAY. WE WANT YOU TO SAY THAT WE THANK YOU FOR YOUR SERVICE AND WE APPRECIATE YOU JOINING US THIS MORNING. BUT FIRST I WANT TO BEGIN FIRST WOULD LOOK TO NEW YORK. CAN YOU TELL US WHERE YOU'RE FROM AND HOW THANKSGIVING LOOKS WHILE SERVING OVERSEAS. YEAH. SO I'M FROM A SMALL TOWN ILLINOIS. ALTAMONTE, REALLY THAT LOOKS LIKE JUST ME GATHERING WITH MY FAMILY. HERE IN FULL IN IT'S A DIFFERENT KIND OF FAMILY THAT WE GET TOGETHER WITH POTENTIAL BROTHERS IN ARMS THAT ARE OUR LIVES OVER WE GET SHARE MEALS WITH I LOVE THAT KNOW WHERE ARE YOU FROM AND WHAT'S THE HARDEST PART ABOUT BEING AWAY FOR THE HOLIDAYS. HOW DO YOU KEEP YOUR SPIRITS UP. I'M REALLY FROM TULSA, OKLAHOMA, BUT I LISTED OUT OF HOUSTON, TEXAS BEING OUT HERE. IT'S REALLY NICE TO GET TO TRAVEL EUROPE TO THE RICH HISTORY CULTURE AROUND H HERE. THAT'S WHAT HE'S YOU KNOW, IT. I LOVE IT AS OUR WHERE ARE YOU FROM? IN THE DISHES THAT YOU MISS HIM TODAY IN THE TRADITIONS. PRO-LIFE HOW WANT AND BEEN THE NO NOTHING TODAY IN THE MIDDLE THINKING THAT WHAT THAT YOU KNOW, EARLIER TODAY I WAS SPEAKING WITH RETIRED AND I BOTH ARE VETERANS AND WE TALKED ABOUT WHILE SERVING OVERSEAS AND BEGIN MILITARY. THE PEOPLE AROUND YOU IMMEDIATELY BECOME YOUR FAMILY. I NEED YOU TO TELL ME, I KNOW STARTED HOW MANY BROTHERS AND SISTERS DID YOU FOUND OUT YOUR HEAD. WOULD YOU STATION OVER THERE. OH, MY GOODNESS. LIKE BECOME BECOME SO CLOSE RIGHT AWAY. YOU GET NOTHING CERTAIN GAMES. TRAINING RIGHT. WE DO ABOUT HERE. YOU KNOW, YOU GET THE STOPS AND DROPS HELPING GETTING OTHERS TO BACK TO YOU BECAUSE ONE OF THE THINGS I TELL PEOPLE ALL THE TIME, TOO, IS THAT MESSAGES FROM HOME REALLY CAN HELP TO PASS THE TIME AND MAKES A DIFFERENCE AND PEOPLE WELL, HE DOESN'T WANT TO HEAR FROM ME AGAIN, TALK TO EVERYBODY BACK HOME ABOUT WHY IT'S SO GOOD TO HEAR FROM PEOPLE WHO ARE STILL STATESIDE. YEAH. I GOT A LOT OF LETTERS FROM MY FAMILY'S ALL THE TIME. ACTUALLY, THEY THE FACT THAT IT INDIFFERENT PAY FOR THE MALE REALLY GREAT TO HEAR HEAR BACK FROM I KNOW I NEED TO WRITE THEM MORE THAN TIME. WHENEVER I CAN. IT'S GOING TO GET A LITTLE PIECE HOME. I'LL TELL YOU A LITTLE SECRET. WHAT I USED TO DO BECAUSE I'M A LITTLE BIT OLDER. I USED TO JUST DO A AUDIO RECORDING ITS IN THE TAKE BACK BECAUSE I CAN NEVER REMEMBER TO WRITE EVERYTHING DOWN. AND LITERALLY JUST HAVE THIS CONVERSATION. AND IT'S JUST OF THE THINGS THAT PEOPLE BACK HOME. THEY LOVE HEARING FROM JAVIER ANYONE YOU'D LIKE TO SAY HELLO TO. AS THTHE TWINS.APPY BIRTHDAY. AND MY MOM AND MY GRANDMA. HAPPY THANKSGIVING. I LOVE TELL YOUR BY YOU WANT TO SAY HELLO TO. YEAH, I GOT MY PARENTS AND MY FAMILY ALL WATCHING PROBABLY GRANDPARENTS. WELL, LOVE YOU GUYS. I MISS SO MUCH. CAN'T WAIT TO BE BACK HOME. YOU'VE GOT LOVE IN LOVE YOU GUYS. THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR THIS INSURGENT. MAY ANYBODY YOU WANT TO SAY HELLO TO. YES, WANT TO SAY HELLO TO MY FAMILY, MY FRIENDS, MY LIFE INTO GUY LEFT ON YOU KNOW SERGEANT MAY BEFORE YOU GO, I HAVE SOMEONE WHO WOULD LIKE TO SAY HELLO TO YOU. BEEN DEACTIVATED AND OH, THERE IT MEAN, OUT AND GIVING IT JENNA. STARTED MY COMPANY. I KNOW THAT MOM AND DAD. WHAT DOES IT MEAN TO SEE, YOU KNOW, BE ABLE TO CHECK IN AND DO THIS LITTLE SURPRISE. I'M HOLDING BACK TEARS RIGHT IT'S GREAT ONE OF SMALL MOMENTS WHEN DON'T GET DON'T GET TO DO THIS OFTEN. SO ANYTIME YOU GET A CHANCE TO CONNECT WITH IS PARTICULARLY FAMILY IN THIS CASE MILITARY. ALWAYS GREAT AS SAID, THAT CONDITION THE FAMILY WAYS THIS HUGE AND MOM AND DAD. I I THINK THAT PEOPLE THINK COME ON. SHE'S SHE'S IN THE MILITARY. SHE'S SHE'S A FULL-GROWN ADULT. YOU ALWAYS BE YOUR BABY. ONE OF THE THINGS WE TALK ABOUT TOO, IS HOW GOOD IT IS TO HEAR FROM FAMILY MEMBERS WHEN THEY'RE STATIONED OVERSEAS. I KNOW THAT SHE'S ALWAYS TOP OF MIND FOR YOU. BUT CAN SPREAD THE WORD OF CHEER TO OTHER FAMILIES WHO MAY HAVE A LOVED 1 STATIONED OVERSEAS RIGHT NOW. WHAT IS YOUR WORD OF ENCOURAGEMENT FOR THEM. A LOT, OK TO THEM. EVEN APPLE BE HAPPY TO BE GRATEFUL. YOU HAVE A FAMILY MEMBER WHO'S OUT THERE PROTECTING THE NATION. WE'RE TAKING OUR FREEDOM. WE HAVE BEEN GRATEFUL. WE HAVE PEOPLE SAME. WE HAVE BEEN GRATEFUL YOU HAVE A CASE LIKE THAT. WE ARE SAFE BECAUSE THEY EVEN THOUGH THEY ARE IN THE MILITARY. IT COULD HAVE MUCH WORSE LOCATION WHEN TIME OF THEY WERE THEY WANT TO BE. BUT FORTUNATELY FOR US AND FOR THEM DOING A GREAT PLACE. SO VERY HAPPY FOR THAT. SO IF YOU'RE IF YOU WERE IF YOU'RE UP, SAID THERE'S A FAMILY MEMBER IS NOT AT HOME. TAKE TAKE SOLACE. TAKE THINGS IN THE FACT THEY ARE IN A PLACE WHERE THEY'RE SAFE. THE PLACE THEY CAN HAVE PLACE THERE WITH BROTHERS AND SISTERS IN ARMS AND THEY'RE THEY'RE STILL LOVED ONES. THEY STILL HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY TO TALK TO BE AROUND. SO IT COULD HAVE BEEN SOMETHING WORSE THAN WHAT I WAS IN. WE DO HAVE VIDEO CALLS. SO THIS RIGHT HERE FOR|||foreign so the pilots can qualify with Poland announced that it would like to purchase up to 96 ah-64 eopass helicopters from the United States the hopping near triple digit order would replace the country's Fleet of me 24 hind helicopter gunships an aged Cold War era design and would also make Poland the largest Apache operator besides the United States Army yeah a statement from Boeing the defense company behind the Apache is on said that they were honored the government of Poland has selected the ah-64 EA patch for the Polish Armed Forces new attack helicopter Fleet it added that an Apache selection strengthens U.S polish military ties by enhancing interoperability and cooperation between Poland the U.S army and NATO Nations during the procurement process Boeing established significant Cooperative Partnerships across polish government and Industry our partnership with the Polish armaments group in particular will continue to expand as we Implement training and sustainment efforts with local industry this latest order comes on the heels of a significant polished spending spree on military equipment the country on NATO's Eastern flank shares a border with Ukraine and is acutely aware of the danger of Russian aggression in addition to a massive 250 M1 Abrams order the latest sekv-3 variant Poland has also ordered 180 K2 tanks from South Korea 48 f850 light fighter aircraft also from South Korea on top of the country's prior order for 32 F-35 Joint Strike Fighters a tweet from Poland's Marius blast Jack both the Deputy Prime Minister and the minister of National Defense was emphatically positive more good news blastak said we have issued a request for proposal to the U.S for the acquisition of 96 ah-64 efatch helicopters in the latest gertian version for land forces Aviation along with the helicopters we will also acquire technology transfer part of Poland's swath of new equipment is to replace the extensive inventory of equipment the country has donated to Ukraine in addition to over 300 armored fighting Vehicles about 110 self-propelled guns and over 230 tanks the country has donated a host of small arms and ammunition and is the central hub for Western Aid flowing into Ukraine Poland's geographical proximity to Russia as well as the multiple armed struggles it has fought against invading armies be they Imperial Russian forces Nazi troops or the Soviet Red Army have convinced Warsaw that to be strong is to be safe and by opting for arguably the most advanced Weaponry in existence today Poland is making good on that assumption|||foreign [Music] [Music] good morning everyone we are on a
mountain trail going around Morskie Oko Lake leading us to another mountain lake called
Czarny Staw. Czarny Staw is on the way to the highest peak
of Poland called Rysy. It supposed to take us not longer than two
hours to get to that Lake, from there we will see how the weather will be maybe we will
even go to the top of Rysy and yeah pretty excited to see it, because it's the first
time when I will be there it's hard to tell anything more, because it's not decided yet. We'll see what we'll do when we get there,
so see you later [Music] it took us around one hour to get the Chinese stuff from shelter
the trail was very pleasant easy and then it was slightly stiff but I think that everybody
can do that if you are at mosh keoko it's definitely worth to come here as both Lakes
are extremely beautiful and the views are just magical right now we're going over there
and we hope to see both Lakes from that point and to make some beautiful photos [Music]
so our goal for today was to get to the viewpoint on the way to Rysy. Rysy is the highest mountain peak in Poland
so it's a very popular trail and it's always busy there are many people so it's impossible
to be here alone it took us two hours to get here from the Schronisko Morskie Oko and the
trail wasn't very challenging physically but if you're scared of heights it might be slightly
difficult for you and scary, but believe me that the views are rewarding and it's totally
worth to come here. We spend a little bit of time here and now
we're going down back to the shelter to have our breakfast [Music] thank you hey we're almost there and it's
Czarny Staw let's go [Music] it's 12:30 we just got down the mountain and
it's time for breakfast we bought ourselves very delicious traditional Polish food all
the food here in the shelter it's below 10 euros but it's very delicious and despite
that there are many people here they're cooking very fast we stay at the second floor On this floor we have four rooms. This is ours, there's one more one more here
and one here. We've got two bathrooms on this floor and
a washroom very nice and clean and here we have a device for drying our shoes so it's
pretty cool. Let's get inside! Room 18 here we are so this room has place
for six people uh from what I see now we have the whole room packed this is the place where
we stay two beds for two of us we have a nice view from the window this is the entrance
to Mosquito shelter this place is very simple but it has everything we need we've got nice
clean and soft beds we've got hot showers we've got good food in the restaurant well
it's a perfect place for your Mountain Adventure after a short rest and a breakfast at 12 in
the shelter we spoke with our roommate and she advised us to check out another short
Trail leading from the shelter to the valley behind the monk the monk is a famous climbing
spot here locally and unfortunately we don't have enough time today or gear to climb up
the mountain but we will go ahead and check out the valley behind the Monk and as we left
the forest we can actually see the monk now yep so this is the Monk and that's how the
trail looks like we will hike up a bit for an hour get the valley and then decide if
we're going somewhere further or are we going back to the shelter weather is still pretty
fine but it's getting cloudy and might get a bit rainy in the evening so we'll see what
the day will bring what are you saying about that I like the
plan it doesn't seem very challenging but the view is like extremely beautiful so I'm
excited oh just came from here this is the shelter let's go today we also testing out
our new purchase the insta360 one X2 and tell us how is it is it better than the previous
footage what do you think [Music] a very common thing you would notice here
on trails in Poland is that people say hello to each other they say dobre or they say chest
which means High learn those two words and you can Mingle in between the trails [Music] people comparing to Mexico so we'll see what's
going to be at the top let's go [Music] we decided to finish today's hike here right
now we're on the trail leading from Morse to the valley of five polish Lakes from here
we can see both of the Lakes we can see more skoko and Charlie stuff the view is very beautiful
that's why we decided to stay here and spend a little bit more time enjoying the view I have to say that this is one of the most
Pleasant trailers I walked in Tetra mountains I think this Trail is for everyone it's not
very tiring but it's very rewarding now it started raining so I think it's time to go
to shelter [Music] hey guys we just got back to mosca Orca Lake today we walked over 20
kilometers we've seen a few beautiful viewpoints we've seen more scalca Lake and turning stuff
like from two different perspectives walking around morsica Alco was very pleasant we are
very satisfied with today and now we're going to have our dinner take shower and have a
good rest as tomorrow we're going to wake up very early see you tomorrow [Music] thank you for watching we hope you like this
video if you do leave some comments and hit the like button don't forget to subscribe
our Channel see you in the next one|||yo what's going on guys my name is MI from Poland I'm here with Chris AKA Rudy Rudy he's from the UK and today we're going to be reacting to why Poland is quietly becoming Europe's next superpower all right so this is a bit different to the kind of stuff that we normally do um but we wanted to sort of delve into some other some other stuff about Poland um we we were looking at sort of some football some football related stuff some history related stuff and we thought you know what this is a good subject um and it's stuff that I've seen happening recently as well like Poland is you know the their military might cuz they because they're soose to Russia and stuff like that and um you know even when we've been there and and because I've been there twice this year it's you can see that it's just becoming you know better better exactly some people might disagree so let us know also comment on I was going to say comment down below what town you're from just curious if someone goes Leicester or something then I'm going to be from Bogner reg just no um yeah let's get straight into it this is the classic stereotype of Poland a gray poor postcommunist country with nothing to offer but cheap unqualified labor but this stereotype is no longer true and Poland of today looks more like this in the past 30 years Poland went through an incredible transformation growing more than any other economy in Europe and faster than Asian tigers like Singapore South Korea or Taiwan today Poland is emerging as a major technological Hub the Polish economy might overtake the UK by 2030 and after years of suffering from a massive brain drain highly skilled poles are now coming back home and it goes Way Beyond the I need to go back home yeah I don't think they're talking about you they said big brains big brains ex you left the brains went up if I come back I'm they're going to make a video why Poland is quietly not yeah why why Poland is not deining unknown reason why it's declining economy as Poland is building one of the most powerful militaries in Europe and quickly becoming one of the most influential European countries as all of these changes continue to pick up pace it's getting impossible to ignore Poland's growing importance but there is still one thing that could destroy the entire polish Miracle a threat not from the outside but from within so how did Poland manage to become Europe's biggest success story this guy set up the story he's like it's not Russia it's from within why is it doing so much better than everyone else and what is the challenge threatening to end everything that it has achieved this R very dramatic the [Music] rise but first a word from the sponsor of this video blink anyway um we'll skip that sponsor thanks for the video thanks thanks for the sponsor and now back to the video but to understand why Bin's transformation is such a big stand there weren't we I'm pretty sure we took a picture like down here or something like that yeah was it here yeah yeah we walked in into that part there or was it this bit we did it over in the park bit it was something like that no no no no no I mean no we recorded the short there yeah yeah yeah if if you guys haven't seen the short it's on the channel we recorded a short literally right down here um ear this year to be fair we went all around there bro yeah yeah yeah we need to understand where it started from in the 20th century after becoming the first country to be invaded by Nazi Germany and L 20% of its population in World War II Poland became part of the Eastern block as one of the Soviet controlled satellite States like in the rest of the Eastern block the 40 Years of Communism were times of deep economic isolation stagnation and overall I couldn't imagine sorry um I couldn't imagine like going like back in the day when there was like nothing on the shelves you know you'd go to get bread and like potentially these days is too much like I feel like we have too much on on on on on on the shelves like they throw stuff away I remember even here they throw literally boxes of drinks away and stuff like that when when it's not get sold and it's just it's just waste but hopelessness had to import the Soviet system of centrally planned economy where state owned almost everything private businesses were mostly non-existent and since they were basically a Soviet Colony the Polish economy was subservient to interests of the Soviet Union and forced to make Buy and sell whatever Moscow wanted it to whether it made economic sense or not as a result the centrally plant economy was deeply disfunction average Polish person today were average smiling Polish person back the back in the day we was already already given the Polish smile was deeply dysfunctional and mismanaged crippled by constant shortages of basic goods and lack of resources when the Communist regimes of Eastern Europe finally fell in 1989 and Poland became free free and independent it emerged from behind the Iron Curtain as one of the poorest countries in Europe with highly dysfunctional infrastructure and public services and with basically no experience with where start as like a as like a government where do you even start to like recover from something like that all your people are just un not are not highly educated there's no jobs no I mean that's not their fault it's the fault of the Soviet Union we've always been highly educated shut up and and this from a non-educated wasn't right here anyway Mari cier was the first woman to that wasn't during the Soviet Union you donut doesn't matter I'm talking about us being Highly Educated okay we're talking about look at me we're talk can you stop talking about yourself for a moment we're we're talking about years like Decades of being under Soviet Union control like where did you even start from that that that's probably why everyone left and started coming to countries like this America and stuff yeah and participating in a global economy the average salary was 10 times lower than in Germany and the country was struggling with hyperinflation in other words it wasn't a country you would bet on to become a major success but skip 30 years ahead into the future and that's exactly what happened so how did Poland do it from 1992 Poland managed to grow consecutively for almost three decades achieving the longest period of growth in modern European history now not many countries are able to do that and the reason is that usually when they find successful strategy they tend to stick to it long after it stops working but Poland so far managed to find a different growth strategy for each of the three decades which allowed it to grow so fast for so long starting in the early 1990s its main challenge like in every other post-communist country was how to transition from a centralized state-owned economy to a capitalist one in most countries these transitional reforms were in one way or another quite problematic either they took too long or they became pretty corrupt and bu of the state wealth was transferred into hands of a few wealthy oligarchs who got rich because of their political connections Poland on the other hand it's always like that it's always like there's some rich people they getting power and then they they take away the money for themselves they corrupt it and they make it worse for everyone below but it doesn't seem like based on what he's saying it doesn't seem like that's what happened in Poland because you do hear about Russian oligarchs and Ukrainian oligarchs who own so much and have so much money um and they're basically in charge of the country but I feel like it happens everywhere you feel like that's in Poland as well surely come on man yeah but I but what I mean is is like if that is the case it doesn't seem like it's affected the economy of the country in itself where it has countries like Ukraine and it's interesting because I don't know I hear lots of different opinions right um about Poland in general like from this video it looks like Poland's doing amazing and stuff but when I'm listening to some people they they don't think it's doing that well so guys us know that's why that's why this video has some dislikes as well I mean people will disagree with the situation and they will say no well for me it's not like that but if you're yourself living where you are now and you ask your parents who moved away from from Poland surely they would look back now and they would go it's probably much better than it was true and manage this transition arguably better than others it transitioned to capitalism quickly but privatized most of the state-owned companies slowly and a few years later than most of its neighbors after the chaos calmed down and after it became a little bit harder to steal everything thanks to that it became pretty much the only post-communist country without an economy dominated by oligarchs and without an economic crash in the 1990s but despite the Good Start in the early 2000s this wasn't enough anymore in order to grow and so the next phase was about globalization in 2004 Poland joined the European Union and the open European market with a free movement of goods and services without any barriers between Poland and the rest of Europe it made sense for Western European companies to move their manufacturing over to Poland where they had a large and a very cheap pool of workers at their disposal and while these companies kept most of the profit Poland got enough out of it to keep growing at a pretty fast pace and joining the EU brought another major benefit since one of its ke principles is redistribution yeah sharing and stuff so if Poland was down here and every other country was up here you know it's going to balance itself out for Poland this was good yeah but you say but Greece for instance um went bankrupt and it brought like the Euro down as a whole for instance and stuff like that and even even though that even though they were sort of part of the EU um maybe it didn't work out for yeah I mean it doesn't work out for everyone but I think in Poland's case it's different because they joined for a reason to be able to join like globally and stuff I don't know the full history yeah of money from wealthier member states to the less developed ones in order to balance the wealth disparity across the union after joining the Eastern European states started to receive a lot of money and Poland managed to use them to build and improve everything from roads to universities and again in a lot more efficient way than in many other Eastern European I think for sure roads have improved since like when I was there even just recently I was actually making a joke to everyone cuz I was like with people in the car and I kept making a joke like oh there's a bridge being built over there and like I said it once right and then I just kept making it a joke like every time there was a bridge being built I was like there's another bridge and like it was just like at one point I was like how many bridges are being built in like roads and everything it was like that when we were in warsa there's so much building going on there's so much development yeah like and it was crazy I when I used used to drive to my grandma's house right um from my dad's side bcha yeah bap's house um he used to take me take us about 4 hours now it would take about 2 hours really so they've just made like I guess they made tunnels and bridges and blah blah blah to make it much easier yeah highways highways yeah countries but that can still only take you as far in many countries following a similar trajectory eventually fall into the so-called middle inome trap if your economy is based on providing cheap labor for foreign companies you can only grow to a certain level and if you can't offer anything else apart from that and you don't have any major companies of your own you're stuck but so far Poland seems to be avoiding that 15 years ago foreign companies were coming in to hire low-skilled and low paid workers for menial labor but today they're coming because Poland has one of the largest pools of engineering talent in Europe and instead of where bro I'm telling you so many of my cousin friends all engineers and developers software developers and I I didn't know that PO had such a big movement on that side like I didn't I haven't heard of any even the teeken Warsaw apparently is crazy though like um and there's well I don't know if there's a lot of jobs but I think so it sounds like it B based on this video but I mean he but he's going to tell us what's going to bring Poland down soon warehouses and basic factories companies like Google are opening search and development hubs now that said Poland is still relatively poor at least compared with most of Western Europe but the growth so far has been impressive and unusually inclusive average wages in the country massively increased while inequality remained low and so it's not a growth that would only exist on paper or only help select few but it actually trickled down to the rest of the society and there's one more area outside of economic growth where Poland has been getting a lot of attention lately and that's milary also just before we go into the military I just wanted to highlight like when I've recently been to Poland and the the people that I've spoke to I feel like I don't know even just looking at like how much they were able to like go out and buy like we was going to like restaurants yeah and I was thinking this is quite expensive whilst I was bringing pounds right um and these guys were like yeah we can go out like eat once a week in a nice restaurant like stuff like that and I'm thinking you know that that's a good sign right um and also like clothes wise and what what um what jobs they're performing and how much they're earning not everyone was telling me that but some of the closer friends and stuff yeah um there's definitely a difference there there definitely it felt like everyone was living fairly um okay but then but then but then you but then you can feel that here as well can't you you can feel that here but then you can you can go out down the street and see a homeless person or you can go and find people that aren't living well and stuff like that yeah it's it's obviously different based on different people and stuff um yeah but but but let's see what the military say it's unprecedented military buildup historically Poland has some good reasons to be a little paranoid Stu between Germany and Russia it has been invaded partitioned colonized and stripped of its independence time and time again and even though today it's in NATO this historical memory is still there and while most European countries were taking their peace dividends Poland has kept military funding at one of the highest levels in NATO and after the Russian invasion of Ukraine it went into an overdrive it announced that in just a few years it will increase its military spending to 5% of its GDP higher than any other NATO member double the size of its Armed Forces to 300,000 and buy thousands of Tanks fighter jets and other military equipment and before the end of the decade Poland plans to have the most powerful ground forces in Europe in what would be one of the most ambitious military buildups in modern European history now that being said what Poland has achieved so far is impressive and what it plans to achieve is that kov or g g SC I see this is the thing I've seen a street in kov that has a tunnel like this at the end no it's not like that though yeah I know what one you're talking about um no this is din we got a picture there as well is it what right here yeah yeah yeah damn I we need to go back to put in again even more so but it's yet to be seen if all that will actually happen despite its successes there are some significant risks that could kill the entire polish miracle and not everyone is so bullish on Poland's future for a long time demography has been considered the number one threat as around half a million people have left the country in the last 30 years but now it looks like Poland managed to reverse this trend in recent years it has seen a what was it this place that whiskey in a jaw I remember we had food at this place in GL but I don't know if it was this one or if they no it was it was next to the river right yeah yeah first brain drain as poles and people with Polish Heritage living abroad have started coming back to the country and since the country tooken over 1 and a half million Ukrainian refugees the demographic TRS are looking much better and so there are really two major risks first while the growth has been impressive Poland has not actually avoided the middle income trap completely so far it's still massively reliant on foreign investments and although tech centers are being opened in Warsaw they are set up by Foreign companies rather than by polish yeah I knew this so much of it so this is what what what it's saying is maybe is that Poland needs its own companies it needs its own spill like needs its own Googles and Samsungs and whatever's um built up but then how do you I feel like it's difficult in a market like that to be able to bring something in and have it dominate when you've got so many other massive companies that dominate everything else um I mean I'm I'm sure it come there are some there are some ones and while that brings jobs and growth once again there is a limit to how high you can grow since most of the profits will always end up leaving the country in the end in order to break into the big leagues you need your own domestic Giants in sectors with high eded value and Poland doesn't have that or at least not yet but the far bigger risk is of a completely different nature and it concerns a part of the Polish story that we haven't touched on yet the thing is that Poland is a deeply deeply divided country so much that we can almost talk about two different polands one liberal and Progressive and the other deeply conservative and religious like in the US the two that is I think that is a problem what a problem kind like the same as the American side of things where there are there are two there will always be two very different groups of people that that that want to see change you'll have the people that and I feel like you've had in con Poland's had this group of people who are you know so patriotic and and and they've been in power for so long now what if now what if a different government comes into Power based on younger people more liberal side of it who who want to see a lot of stuff legalized like you know like the LGBT side of things which isn't legal in Poland um you know that could cause a rift in in the way things like it does in America you got so many different group so staunch different views like I mean we saw it ourselves in G we walked through literally an LGBT protest with people in skull masks and and and other people waving the flags and stuff and police anti protest yeah like it was yeah and that I think that's that's one of Poland's thing if you look at it from the outside cool but yeah it is divided in terms of it people Civil War coming are finding it increasingly difficult to coexist together and surveys show that both sides are highly suspicious of each other intolerant to opposing views and increasingly refusing to compromise and for years the current conservative government has been criticized by the liberal opposition for supposedly bending the rule I mean obviously things are changing now as well with all the voting I'm not actually too sure as of today of what's Happening um I'm not really following it that much but things are changing um so we'll see if it's forther better but who knows yeah RS in order to stay in power and it has had a growing beef with the European Union that's threatening to cut Poland off from EU funds as a punishment for not upholding the rule of law and the thing is that whatever side you cheer for the end result is bad for both and for Poland in general the country needs both parts of the population to coexist and work together and it needs the EU if it wants to be truly successful and if it doesn't manage to do that the Polish Miracle will be over soon before it has really started damn he's he to be fair I think he made some good points in there I think he talked about some good stuff um thanks to explained with dom um obviously for this video and um yeah it's it was really good actually understanding what the different where it's come from what it's done and where it could go like some there's definitely some good like theories of how it could go and what what it need what Poland needs to do to to get to a to get to a good point basically um yeah good video um informative thoughts what do you think gonna happen I just well what do you want to happen what I want to happen is for Poland to keep growing obviously I mean that's that's crazy by 20 was it 2030 or 2060 2030 it could be a bigger economy than the UK like that's mad but then again our government here is just [ __ ] yeah I feel like Poland might be going up UK might be going down so yeah yeah it's it's it's a it's good it's great it's interesting though maybe I can go back one time maybe one day not one time get him out guys um anyway but yeah guys let us know what you think let us know what you think is going to happen your your theories what you think of Poland and where you think it's going to go just yeah let let us know in the comments um and if you want to see more videos like this uh just let us know as well leave some recommendations and thank you again to explained with dom for the video very good we'll link that in the yeah we'll link that in the description make sure to give him a like and and a subscribe and yeah what are you lying for what do you mean but from us also and we'll see you in the next one peace peace||| Well, yes I am in the city of Leszno That is the Greater Poland Voivodeship Poland Well, my transport is delayed 10 minutes, so I can tell you that I'm going to the Czech Republic Because one professor invited me there He wants me to make a presentation about the Interslavic language Moment Well, so  And I thought to take use this opportunity to do a little reportage From that excursion around Europe And on the Slavic land Well, recently I was in the center of the city of Leszno And you can see short fragments from this walk I didn't have much time But No problem Here, you can see classic Polish constructions Houses colored houses From the 19th century colorful houses with ornaments Some buildings should be renovated Some renovation should be  Home renovation would be nice
32
00:02:08,017 --> 00:02:11,368
recoloring, and so on making a repairs But you can think how beautiful that would look if all houses were so colorful and with ornaments And here for example, I think, that is, already a more communistic construction a socialistic-like flat It's windy and you won't hear anything Okay, well, well, Wait a moment, I still don't know how to work with this But I'll give you a question: for what reason  I came to this street? To Lešno? I wanted to show you that
50
00:03:20,095 --> 00:03:17,833
That is the Slavic Street, "Słowiańska" in Polish And why is it so special? simply there is such a street in many Polish cities with such a name in the city of Poznan, for example And also in the city of Wrocław there are not only Slavic streets  but also the streets of many Slavic tribes for example, like the street of the Polabian Slavs Lech, Czech and Rus streets Serbian street Lutici street from the Lutici tribe and so on and so forth That is an interesting phenomenon I don't know how it is in other countries maybe in Turkey for example, there are streets with names of all the Turkic nations Or for example in Germany there are streets with names of the Germanic nations and tribes it would be interesting to see  it look, it's there a classical Polish building colorful ornaments you can see different ornaments In Polish that type of home is called „kamienica” for being made of stone (kamenj), obviously stones here we have a beautiful street with trees if there are trees is in the city I already,  like  without waiting such a city Just lot of trees make a better atmosphere in the place a lot of plants, greenery well for example, it can be also a tree like that but it might be difficult to make it grow for a long time in such a small pot Grncu, grně Yes In the Interslavic language, it will be "grn" or "grnec" at that moment, I don’t remember which word is better intelligible Sadly we cannot look at all structures, monuments and statues that are in the city of Leszno for the fact that I need to depart in about half an hour to continue the travel to Wrocław… This is simply an experimental video I want to see what will be the result of it, but it's the firs time  I create such videos Umbrellas this Obviously it must have some symbolic meaning but I don't know what
121
00:07:03.010 --> 00:07:05.248
maybe you can write that under the video I would like to show you something common in this part of Europe that means: in every city in Central Europe There is a city structure a city scheme in line with Magdeburg rules If I remember it well that name. This means: every city has the main square A main center of the city for example, I spoke with Ukrainians they said, that in their cities it's not like that There's no central place There is something like the historical center of the city but there are just historical houses There's no central square I'm not an expert but you can see all cities even very small cities have something like that In the villages the center of the village was the church and in the cities it was the house of politicians the house of the head of the city as you can see here in Polish it's “ratusz” and, obviously really colourful, beautiful buildings kamienice you can see them, you can walk waste time, play, like the children here buy something to eat and so on You can walk in small streets sitting in restaurants caffes and just have a nice time eat something burgers or traditional Polish food I have to say this the main square main city center is in a good condition Well that is… many, many buildings are in good condition I like this place beautiful houses it's good, it's good traditional Polish food, kebab from India I don't even know where the kebab is from from India, or from the Arabs, or from Persia I do not know Ah, see, a musician I like it a lot I also played a few times on the street Let's talk to him Let's see if he will understand me Good day! Excuse me, can I record the video? (Polish-Russian)
Ah, greetings, I know, I had to learn Russian I was solding electronics from Vienna in Lviv  Oh, very good, very good Can I make a video? -With me? -Yes. Okay, but in front of that, I'll be beautiful. OK OK Listen, Do you know any traditional Polish songs? I can play almost every Polish song And German also And the Russian ones:  "Ljegko na sierce ot pjesnji viesioloj" I learnt it, but it's been a long time and I don't remember - Please, play. - Yes, there is no need to waste time Some... a Polish, traditional song Thank you very much Well, here, right? What a disgrace appeared in Europe, sir! Yes, disgrace Are you a famous musician? Well, look, look how many people, there was a record, not far from here, Osieczna city, Osieczna And that's me That was a competition, right? No, we were beat the record for the number of accordionists Gathering, people gathered Yes a gathering of accordionists Look, how beautiful girls there are here, near the town hall Look, I had an accordion, Do some photos Well, wait... They are Ukrainians they played here Ukrainians played? Yes take a photo 
2 3 4
00:12:23,630 --> 00:12:26,062
Well, it's a video what is your name? Ryszard Ryszard? Andrei also Okay, thank you, sir! And you? I'm Michal Michal? Yes And my son is Mikolaj Hah, see No, he's Artur Mikolaj Okay, thank you for playing Dear people, if you see... Spasiba, danke schon, merci, and in Polish? Thank you! Thank you! Dear people, if you will see Mr. Ryšard
you can give him something Michal, you speak really nice, you really nice Thank you, thank you very much Bye, a healthy summer vacation to you! I want to give you something What? I talk a lot and then I don't remember I don't give much, boy, but that's for you Ah, nothing is written here, wait it was somewhere I want to give you my address as well When you come back to your place sometime send me a nice postcard, Okay if you'll remember Obviously Well, here's the address Thank you, it was Mr. Ryszard from Leszno And, there is also a photography Well, we had a good talk, thank you Again, bye! Bye, bye! Well, dear people, the first experiment was very successful if you see Mr. Ryszard in city ​​center in Leszno in the city of Leszno you can give him some money in order to allow him to continue to play the accordion Ah, it is necessary to go back There's no much time I need to go  in the Czech Republic, we'll see Oh, what a beautiful building unfortunately, it also needs a little renovation, but look at this beautiful ornaments It's a post office very beautiful unfortunately it's windy and also there are many noisies from aut from the engines but let's see how it'll be, if you will hear me well or not I could tell his man Ryszard, Mr. Ryszard that it's no Ukrainian or an another Slavic language but that's Interslavic but I didn't have time to explain what is Interslavic what is this project but as you can see, the communication was effective very good I am satisfied of that experiment we move on to Tanvald Czechs, you will have an Interslavic visit The wind here is terrible By the way, that song played by Mr. Ryszard I know it It's the song "Maryjanna" And it's a classic romantic song There is a guy who loves a woman And, simply, she doesn't want him And so he sings about it and then goes to the army and he has no gril anymore but he only has a gun in his hand A history is equal to the 80% of traditional songs But the melody is beautiful, so…|||WITH SLOVAKIA AND BEYONCE WILL FOLLOW SUIT. ADRIAN. ALL RIGHT, JOE, THANK YOU VERY MUCH. ON NEWSNATION, SENIOR RETIRED AIR FORCE LIEUTENANT GENERAL RICHARD NEWTON HERE WITH ME RIGHT NOW TO TELL US. EXACTLY WHAT THIS MEANS AND WHAT IT MEANS FOR THE U.S. WE'VE GOT SLOVAKIA JUMPING INTO THE RING. SHE VISITING MOSCOW AT PUTIN'S INVITATION. MIND. YOU AND THEN PULL IN SENDING THOSE FIGHTER JETS TO UKRAINE HAS THIS WAR MOVED TO A NEW LEVEL. WELL, GOOD MORNING, ADRIAN. I THINK IT'S SIGNIFICANT POLLS AND NOW WE HEAR ABOUT THE WILL BE SENDING A MAY 29 AIRCRAFT. INTO THE FIGHT. I THINK IT'S BEEN A LONG TIME COMING. IN MY OPINION. I PROVIDING MAY 29TH IN THIS CASE WILL BE A BACKFILL FOR SOME LOSSES AT UKRAINIAN AIR FORCE AS A HAS HAD TODAY. BUT NONETHELESS, IT POLLS AND HOPEFULLY OTHER NATO OTHER ALLIES WILL WILL COME IN. THE FACT THAT BUT THESE MAY 29TH IT WILL HELP UKRAINE DEFEND ITS SKIES AND ALSO PROVIDE FOR, I BELIEVE SIGNIFICANT. SUPPORT TO GROUND FORCES AS THIS. WHAT I THINK WILL BE A NEAR TERM SPRING UNDER WAY AGAINST THE RUSSIAN DUGGAN FORCES ESPECIALLY IN THE EASTERN PART OF UKRAINE IN THE DONBAS REGION. BUT IN TERMS OF THE KINDS OF PLANES THAT ARE BEING SENT SOVIET ERA PLANES. AT THE END OF THEIR LIFE. I MEAN. WHY SEND OUT. WHAT'S THE POINT IF THEY'RE NOT UP TO DATE. WELL THERE THERE ARE GOING TO BE STILL SIGNIFICANT AND THE THE FACT THERE'S A STALEMATE RIGHT NOW BETWEEN BOTH ON THE GROUND. BUT ALSO THERE, NOBODY REALLY HAS THEIR THESE AGAIN, AS YOU SAY, THE 1970'S HERE MAY 29TH COULD BE JUST ENOUGH IS A TIPPING TO THAT ABILITY FOR UKRAINE'S TO CONTROL THEIR SKIES. THEY ALSO, HOWEVER, THESE MAY 29TH CAN CARRY WOMAN SYSTEM SUCH AS HIGH ANY RADIATION MISSILES FOR THE SUPPRESSION OF THE SOVIET AIR DEFENSES CAN ALSO PROVIDE A EXTENDED JOINT DIRECT ATTACK MUNITIONS THAT THE UNITED STATES AND PROVIDE WHICH STANDOFF CAPABILITIES TO STRIKE TARGETS WITH SOME MODICUM OF PRECISION FROM 45 MILES OUT. SO I THINK IT'S ACTUALLY FAIRLY SIGNIFICANT. THESE FOR JUST A START. I THINK WE'RE GOING TO BE MORE THAN JUST 4, BUT NONETHELESS, I I THINK IT'S SIGNIFICANT AND I THINK IT COULD BE A GAME-CHANGER FOR THE UKRAINE'S. BUT IN TERMS OF COMPARING THEM TO THE F 16 IS WE KNOW UKRAINIAN TROOPS ARE ACTUALLY CURRENTLY IN THE U.S. TRAINING. ON THOSE JETS UP IT EVEN THE U.S. WILL ACTUALLY JUMP IN TO ACTUALLY SEND FIGHTER JETS TO UKRAINE AS A RESULT OF SOME OF THESE MOVES BY NATO'S ALLIES. MY SOURCES REALLY HAVEN'T CONFIRMED THAT THERE ARE BEING TRAINED. BUT I DO KNOW THAT THE UKRAINE HAS SET UP A LINE ABOUT 55 LUTZ AND SHOULD THE UNITED STATES AGREED TO TRAIN F 16 F 16 IN THE MAY. 29 ARE FAIRLY COMPARABLE. F 16 HAS SOME ADVANTAGES OVER THE THE MAY 29 IT'S MORNING IN A TIGHTER TERM MANEUVERING CAPABILITY. IT'S GOT A PERHAPS A LITTLE BIT MORE MODERN WEAPONIZE OUR WEAPON ON BOARD. THE AIRCRAFT HAS GOT GREAT VISIBILITY IN THE SO. THE MAY 29 CZAR START. I WOULD ALSO ADVOCATE FOR. F 16 FROM UNITED STATES OR OTHER NATO PARTNERS TO ADD TO THE AIR POWER ARSENAL. BUT I DO BELIEVE THAT THIS POINT, IF UKRAINE'S GOING TO WIN FOR CRANES GOING DEFEAT THE RUSSIANS. FOR. IT IS GOING TO BE KEY PROVIDING THAT KEY AIR POWER ON THE GROUND FOR GROUND FORCES ENGAGE WITH THE RUSSIAN TROOPS. AIR POWER IS GOING TO BE SIGNIFICANT. AND SO I THINK WE SHOULD BE|||  Hi how are things? I'm Xavi Luque . Welcome to another video on my channel . If you like the content, don't forget to subscribe at the bottom where the description is, or on the button above . I'm going to go to Poland. With Poland in the Eurovision Song Contest. They debuted in 1994 until today, until 2022. Let's go there! Second??! Just start?! It is the best position to date for Poland The following year they were 18th What? But can anyone hit those notes? OMG What's wrong with the Poles? What voices!!😍 This is the stage where Katrina & The Waves Y by Sebnem Peker won in 1997 Number 11, not bad! I like her voice . She sings very well . I like her. Good voice . We entered 2001. The first song in English? If I'm not mistaken You already know that I prefer each country to sing in their own language, I really don't care. But to prefer, better in their own language Ich Troje, I don't know how to pronounce it! My friend Lukas is going to kill me haha ​​I remember this band in 2005 or 2006 I loved this song! The voice of the girl Also because there are some phrases in Spanish I remember this song A Romani group Romani with O! Ich Troje, 2006 was! I loved this song I didn't understand how it didn't make it to the final I remember the singer was pregnant I loved this song ! I did not understand or understand how it did not go to the final An easy letter but I like Brutal the voice of this woman If I have not misunderstood it was a chorus girl Of the very Beyoncé!! I love this song I would have also liked to see it in the final It was one of my favorites of 2009 She sings very well and the song was very good I've been following her for a long time on social networks Magdalena Tul And without going to the final, what???! I loved that song And here Donatan & Cleo Ah! Very pretty Wow, I love this man Position number 8 and it seems unfair! This was Top3 Brutal I love its aesthetic! When I grow up I want to be like him Very good voice and very good direct Wow Did not qualify? I liked it a lot One of my favorites from Poland And without being classified too... WHY??? what voices!! I love them In 2020 the year it was canceled due to the COVID pandemic Very good voice too After the pandemic they brought Rafal Con Ride and personally it is not one of my favorites from Poland I saw it very imposed As if it were not his style of music Of what best of 2022 As he sings live, that is, as it is heard in the stadium The treble, it is brutal as it is heard there Impressive And the position number 12 Super unfair, it should have been higher So far Poland! Let's see what Poland brings us in the next year By the way, today I saw Sara James from Junior Eurovision She has qualified for the final of America's Got Talent. Congratulations! I'm still listening to Somebody's song from last year by Junior from Poland Waiting for them to bring us because they're doing super well in the Junior Eurovision And let's see what they bring in the senior too. They have to follow the line of Ochman Up to here the video I hope you liked it. If so, give it a LIKE and don't forget to subscribe. Until next time|||Over 500,000 refugees from 125 countries
have already found safety in Poland. Polish borders are open to all
refugees fleeing Russian aggression. You can find the link to guidelines for all refugees in the
description of this video. Poland decided to accept all nationalities right
from the beginning of the conflict in Ukraine Poland is ramping up its efforts to
support refugees fleeing Russian aggression On the Polish
side of the border, hundreds of people wait in long line
to offer transportation to those in need. There are currently hundreds, if not
thousands of initiatives designed to help people inside Ukraine
and the ones who flee the war. Poland created a dedicated website
established to coordinate all the support and provide vital information
for those in need. Despite all these efforts,
there is a substantial number of outlets reporting false information
regarding Poland. Reports suggest Poland is blocking various
nationalities from fleeing war in Ukraine. This is false and hurtful. What we're seeing now is a mix of miscommunication, Putin's propaganda
and just lazy journalism, I guess. Here's the example I
recently stumbled upon. BBC News heartbreaking story about Gabriel, a Nigerian student
fleeing war through Poland. And Gabriel, you were telling me a little bit earlier about what happened to you
when you were trying to board onto the trains. What was your experience
of trying to get out of Ukraine? It was a very terrible experience for me. Like last ten days in Ukraine was very difficult for me
as I was expecting the military. They were very mean. They were just too mean to us. No humans, no food, nothing, no support. It was just on your own. All they said was "go to your embassy". If your embassy is not there,
the rest is up to you. And this was in Lviv. Just to clarify, this was in Lviv. So how did you get
to the border with Poland? Yeah, we walked for like 12
hours from Lviv to Poland. We walked for like 12 hours. Also mine was like 12
hours with no food and nothing. You just have to and then when you got to the border,
what happened to you? What did you see? That was one of my worst experience. The soldiers
on duty that it was mean. They were just so heartless. They treated us like animals totally. There were no human sympathy in any of them. There were some who did come around those places, the soldiers, the borders. We saw some of them with some
weapons that we tried to make. So just understand that we are seeing
these weapons and he said we should go and there's nothing you can do about it
and we're like we can risk our life. So they started chasing
us away, hitting us. You can see that he hit my leg. The reaction on Twitter, to quote just a few:
"Poles are only allowing white people in" "Polish border guards are racist" This made me sick. Millions of Poles are helping war refugees
of all nationalities on daily basis. There's a lot of things you can say about Poland but the way we've conducted
ourselves during this crisis, during this war is definitely
something we should be proud of. So I reached out to BBC
to confront them about the story. Thanks to your support,
they've noticed my comment and decided to replace their 40-second
video with a longer one. The longer video allowed
Gabriel to finish his story. You can see that he hit my leg right here. Gabriel, when you got over the border, then when you were in that bit coming
up to the Polish part, what happened? Yeah, Polish. They were nice to me. At least they worked on me. Give you food. I had one or two conversations
with you, a little bit of relief. I feel like I'm accepted again. thank you so much
for sharing your experience. Thank you so much for talking. Now this is pure example of how easy it is to
manipulate information to divide people. 40-second version of the video about Polish
border and Poles are racist bunch who are providing help exclusively
to white refugees. Full two minute version of the video and Poles are heroes providing help
to all regardless of their nationality. Unfortunately, more and more news
outlets are making similar mistakes. Here's another example where popular French media outlet La Figaro displayed
a map of countries supporting Ukraine. Poland was excluded despite our country being a front line of support
to the Ukrainian people. After confronting reporters, they've updated the map to include
Poland as well as the Baltic countries. Yet another story includes a BBC live
broadcast that suggests that some of the Putin's planes were
stationed inside Poland. Yeah, I mean inside NATO country,
which is obviously false. I'm sure this is not an example of Putin's
propaganda, but yet another mistake. This is why in the difficult times like
this, it is so vital to be precise in the way we communicate
specifically journalists. This is why we all need
to fact-check and verify. You can find links to fact-checking
tutorials in the description below. Activists at the border confirm various
nationalities find safe haven in Poland. This includes a popular
Spanish-American chef, José Andrés. So guys, I'm here
with Jennifer from Nigeria. I just met her here. She's been walking like many others for many hours, if not many days because
the situation is difficult to leave Ukraine to come, because no cars,
no gas and many other issues, I guess. But I was asking her because they were
saying that if Poland and other countries were not allowing citizens from different
countries, especially of Africa. And what do you have
to tell us about that? We didn't actually face
any problem coming here. We just got to the border and then we just had stamped our visas and everything. So I met some people from Congo with her. I saw some people from Jamaica. I saw people from India from different
countries around the world. But I've seen people from different
countries in Africa and I agree with her. Everyone tell me no problem. So don't worry. We're trying to do the government
of Poland and other governments. They are trying to do their best
to take care of the people. Thank you for sharing this with you. And best of luck. People from all over the World appreciate Poland's help to refugees fleeing the war
this includes an inspirational story of Indian refugees fleeing
Russian aggression. When the Soviet Union invaded Poland, an Indian Prince gave refuge to thousands
of Polish children escaping gulags. His Navanagar came to be
called Little Poland. Tonight, 80 years later,
Poland returned the favor. Thank you Adam Burakowsky. India won't forget this. He mentioned Adam Burkowsky,
ambassador of Poland to India. So just to clarify, I'm not
trying to say it's all perfect. When 1 million people flee war, we can
see what's best and worst about humanity. It is not surprising to hear about
violence, racism, bribery, looting. There's no justification for this. And we should prosecute
all those responsible. That being said, these dark episodes
should not define who we are. Ukrainians are defined for their
unprecedented bravery. They are an inspiration to whole free World. Poles are defined through millions
of people providing meaningful help on daily basis to refugees
of all nationalities. Right now more than ever, we need to stand together rather than
to look for reasons stand apart.|||yo bois See me? No? let START Ooooo boiieeeeeeee Gotta go f a s t o hei wanna-- Agh 𝗔𝗪𝗘𝗦𝗢𝗠𝗘 𝘽𝙖𝙣𝙂𝘽𝙣𝙖𝙂𝙣𝙗𝘼𝙣 rip paganism statues scary *getting some territories* ded 🎱 *drop* *crown appear* :O ᴅᴀᴛ ʙᴇᴀᴜᴛɪғᴜʟ :3 Uhh...? █▀▀ █░░ █▀▀█ █▀▀█
▀▀█ █░░ █▄▄█ █░░█
▀▀▀ ▀▀▀ ▀░░▀ █▀▀▀ 🅰️*suprised* HA HA HA HA H∀ S H U T  U P 𝕜𝕟𝕚𝕗𝕖 𝕚𝕟 𝕜𝕟𝕚𝕗𝕖 𝕠𝕦𝕥 eXistential cries *cough* 𝘙𝘶𝘜𝘜𝘶𝘜𝘶𝘮 wtf rook? oh Yes :o ∀∀∀∀∀∀∀∀∀ 1 ÷ 7 🎱 🎱 🎱 You want something betch? O k ǝ ǝ ǝ [thinking] ʷᵃᶦᵗ Wʰᵃ ? *plum* ᗪYIᑎG ᑕᑌTEᒪY [hungry Teutonic Order appaer] 0h its only butter knife *But its too much to day* 🅰️ [magnification with a microscope, u can see atoms now] r^{2}={\frac {b^{2}}{1-e^{2}\cos ^{2}\theta }}={\frac {a^{2}b^{2}}{a^{2}sin^{2}\theta +b^{2}cos^{2}\theta }},} O ʙᴏɪ Y A O O 𝘙 𝘶 𝘯    𝘯 𝘰 𝘸 [expanding territories] What is wrong with YUUUuu just St00*8P hammer pain ded take some lands put Oh BO̵̖̤͕͉͙̮̔̃̍̿͝Ĩ́ͩͧ̈́̓ͪ͌͆ͪ̑ͮ͒͋́ͬ
ͮ̐ͤ̿̀̃ͣͭ͐ͧ̏ͩ̿͋ͫ
͇̤͍̹͇͇ͅ Freinds? want union? 🆗 Lithuania get christianization O LES GOooOo Teutonic.mp4 *supriese* ∀∀∀∀A∀∀∀∀ ded die more A̵̱̜̪̳ Run for help study *pop* huusar +100 to strong, + 100 to attack +1000 to pierogi WhAt is wrong with Y∩o??! Well, Fak u [̲̅2] fight scene O h0 Ho ho H0h Oh Bo𝙸 O ＳＨＵＴ ＵＰ ! *bump x2* pants away *teleport* horse time Oooo looking around *camera movement* wo B0i OU woosh Hy *flip* fake a͈̪̹͑ͨ́̚A͓̰̫͊ͣ̋ͨĂͤ͛ͫ̀A͙͛̌̌ͮ̌ͧ͂ run horse back *crickets* Ooₒ happ days >:( Enouggh of thes sheet slap α ruun Yuo SICK ' fight theme Russia escape AGhaha IM GONNA BURN 𝓲𝓶 𝓰𝓸𝓷𝓷𝓪 【B】【U】【R】【N】 Ahahaha 🚫 pls burn B̶̨̦̦̘̻͓͚͋̈̈́͆͐̾̈́͜ͅR̸͖̳̥͇̉̾̈́̃͝͝U̵̙̝̟͕̓̈́̐̏̚Ǹ̴̗̥̃̉͋́͘͝Ì̵̢̧̨̝̜̰̗͐N̶̜̠͖̭̫͎͈̓͆͂̈́̒͘͝G̴̩̼̯̲̳̪̫̪̞͙̃̇̈́̾̓̑͂͠G̷̘͙̭͉͔̤̬͒̉̾̔̑G̸̮͈̜̓̀G̴̡̛̻̹̥̩͑̒͛̌̈́̍́̕͜ reverse card hit x3 ATLEAST bump 𝙶𝙴𝚃 𝙾𝚄𝚃 so quiet... oh look this mustache W H ∀ T?! WHAT u 𝚆𝚊𝚗𝚝 AAA∀∀∀AA∀A∀ *pop* bai carton sound oj boi a TÜrk NEDİR? *magic* TADA🎉🎉 Y E E T Great Northern War start [remove lego] [remove pierogi] [remove nuts] [remove vodka?] oof snowman You think y re a strong bOi, BUTT I am S̲ ̲ T̲ ̲ R̲  ̲O̲ ̲ N̲  ̲G̲  ̲E̲  ̲R̲ ɐɐɐɐɐɐɐɐɐ hmm door knock knock knock Open THE door open The DOOOR hey open the door plz OK *bump* CO?? WHat Yu want??!! :c cake party 🅰️ munch Ą̸̺̣͕̃̀̍
Ą̸̺̣͕̃̀̍
Ą̸̺̣͕̃̀̍ *panic* N̡̳͙̹̞̟̜̂ͩ͐̈ͣ̌ͦ̍ͩ̈ͮ̇ͧͮ̂̂ͯͤ̕͜Ó̸̶̷͕̜̟͎̞̭̲̬̘͓̜̮̹̺͂̏ͩ̒̇͊̋́̂Ồ̸̴̹̣͈̞̯̬̣̲͇͊͐ͥ̌̍̅ͦ̓̉̐ͣ̂͊͡Ò͕̲̫͖͎̪̠̖͉̟̣̪̝̼̞̺̝̹ͯ̒̍ͦ̌̐ͭ̈́͟O̸̢̲̭̱͖̳͔̬ͭ͋͗̽ͥͮ̈ͥͭ̏̌͋́ͬͩ̎̀̂͘Ȱ̶̡̦̮̤̫̥̹̫̮͕̻̺̑̈́͗̅̊͊ͪͨ͑ͥͨ̈ͬ̚͘͝͞Ȯ̟̝͕͙̟̪͉̖̳̜͈̰̖̟̮̼͗̓̀ͬ̎̽͆̎̊͠Ơ̝̜̲̤̼̥͕̭̟͎̠̗̗͗̐͑ͣƠ̵̡̛̬͓͉̬͗͛̐ͮ̃͐̔̊̏͒͋ͮ̎̈́͆̌̇̏̎Ő̵̰͓̬͈͇̮͕̳͚̟̾̿͆̉̇̈̒̇̆̀͠O̴̳͖̭̯̲̻̳͉̰̞̩̠͎̲̪̤̰ͨͯ̄͛͂̍̕͘͟͜Ö̯͓͉͙̙̰͈̦̘͇̬͍͖͔̣̗̻͈́̃ͫͨ̓ͯ̊̓̆͗̚͟͠Ô̈̐̈́̊̋͏҉҉̮̠̤̫̪ counterattack 1795 rip *baguette* [Poland back] *snowball cannon appear* *Screams in French* magic I want to be independent NO bonk 🔨 ded WWI ends Dropping Polen getting territories 🗞️ [- Poznań] bump [- Wilno] ♟ anvil 1000 attack 200iq [use helm] wtf hacker? [- Kresy Wschodnie] Whaa YOU 𝚆𝙰𝙽𝚃?!! ∀∀∀ Playing lego huh? :((( 𝙸 𝚠𝚊𝚗𝚝 𝚋𝚎 𝙸𝚗𝚜𝚙𝚎𝚍𝚎𝚗𝚝 bonk BOOOM ded 【c】【r】【y】 【u】 【l】【i】【t】 【b】【i】【t】【c】【h】 🔨 🔨🔨 *pop* whoosh small whoosh POLSKA into space :D RUN! (go 𝐒    𝐏    𝐀    𝐂    𝐄) and Yes Poland was in S    P    A    C    E  (1978) how could you not see? ree DAS                  it                          ENOUCH no more comunism in Poland baii ey nato sup? joing NATO ey eu sup? joining EU O Boooie *pop* new door? hope no partitions again bump {famous SR PELO scream} ⓢⓞⓜⓔ ⓘⓝⓕⓞⓢ ↶You can check description for more info↷ FIN? yes i needed few seconds to 5min video ;) Sub?|||TURKEY AND PIE AND THE MEN AND WOMEN IN SERVICE OVERSEAS ARE GATHERED CELEBRATING ALSO STATION AND POLL. WE WANT TO WELCOME IN FIRST LIEUTENANT COLIN YORK. SERGEANT AND PETTY OFFICER FIRST CLASS NOR JAVIER AGAIN AS HAPPY THANKSGIVING. YOU GUYS. AT HEY, WE UNDERSTAND THAT YOU ARE AWAY FROM YOUR FAMILIES TODAY. WE WANT YOU TO SAY THAT WE THANK YOU FOR YOUR SERVICE AND WE APPRECIATE YOU JOINING US THIS MORNING. BUT FIRST I WANT TO BEGIN FIRST WOULD LOOK TO NEW YORK. CAN YOU TELL US WHERE YOU'RE FROM AND HOW THANKSGIVING LOOKS WHILE SERVING OVERSEAS. YEAH. SO I'M FROM A SMALL TOWN ILLINOIS. ALTAMONTE, REALLY THAT LOOKS LIKE JUST ME GATHERING WITH MY FAMILY. HERE IN FULL IN IT'S A DIFFERENT KIND OF FAMILY THAT WE GET TOGETHER WITH POTENTIAL BROTHERS IN ARMS THAT ARE OUR LIVES OVER WE GET SHARE MEALS WITH I LOVE THAT KNOW WHERE ARE YOU FROM AND WHAT'S THE HARDEST PART ABOUT BEING AWAY FOR THE HOLIDAYS. HOW DO YOU KEEP YOUR SPIRITS UP. I'M REALLY FROM TULSA, OKLAHOMA, BUT I LISTED OUT OF HOUSTON, TEXAS BEING OUT HERE. IT'S REALLY NICE TO GET TO TRAVEL EUROPE TO THE RICH HISTORY CULTURE AROUND H HERE. THAT'S WHAT HE'S YOU KNOW, IT. I LOVE IT AS OUR WHERE ARE YOU FROM? IN THE DISHES THAT YOU MISS HIM TODAY IN THE TRADITIONS. PRO-LIFE HOW WANT AND BEEN THE NO NOTHING TODAY IN THE MIDDLE THINKING THAT WHAT THAT YOU KNOW, EARLIER TODAY I WAS SPEAKING WITH RETIRED AND I BOTH ARE VETERANS AND WE TALKED ABOUT WHILE SERVING OVERSEAS AND BEGIN MILITARY. THE PEOPLE AROUND YOU IMMEDIATELY BECOME YOUR FAMILY. I NEED YOU TO TELL ME, I KNOW STARTED HOW MANY BROTHERS AND SISTERS DID YOU FOUND OUT YOUR HEAD. WOULD YOU STATION OVER THERE. OH, MY GOODNESS. LIKE BECOME BECOME SO CLOSE RIGHT AWAY. YOU GET NOTHING CERTAIN GAMES. TRAINING RIGHT. WE DO ABOUT HERE. YOU KNOW, YOU GET THE STOPS AND DROPS HELPING GETTING OTHERS TO BACK TO YOU BECAUSE ONE OF THE THINGS I TELL PEOPLE ALL THE TIME, TOO, IS THAT MESSAGES FROM HOME REALLY CAN HELP TO PASS THE TIME AND MAKES A DIFFERENCE AND PEOPLE WELL, HE DOESN'T WANT TO HEAR FROM ME AGAIN, TALK TO EVERYBODY BACK HOME ABOUT WHY IT'S SO GOOD TO HEAR FROM PEOPLE WHO ARE STILL STATESIDE. YEAH. I GOT A LOT OF LETTERS FROM MY FAMILY'S ALL THE TIME. ACTUALLY, THEY THE FACT THAT IT INDIFFERENT PAY FOR THE MALE REALLY GREAT TO HEAR HEAR BACK FROM I KNOW I NEED TO WRITE THEM MORE THAN TIME. WHENEVER I CAN. IT'S GOING TO GET A LITTLE PIECE HOME. I'LL TELL YOU A LITTLE SECRET. WHAT I USED TO DO BECAUSE I'M A LITTLE BIT OLDER. I USED TO JUST DO A AUDIO RECORDING ITS IN THE TAKE BACK BECAUSE I CAN NEVER REMEMBER TO WRITE EVERYTHING DOWN. AND LITERALLY JUST HAVE THIS CONVERSATION. AND IT'S JUST OF THE THINGS THAT PEOPLE BACK HOME. THEY LOVE HEARING FROM JAVIER ANYONE YOU'D LIKE TO SAY HELLO TO. AS THTHE TWINS.APPY BIRTHDAY. AND MY MOM AND MY GRANDMA. HAPPY THANKSGIVING. I LOVE TELL YOUR BY YOU WANT TO SAY HELLO TO. YEAH, I GOT MY PARENTS AND MY FAMILY ALL WATCHING PROBABLY GRANDPARENTS. WELL, LOVE YOU GUYS. I MISS SO MUCH. CAN'T WAIT TO BE BACK HOME. YOU'VE GOT LOVE IN LOVE YOU GUYS. THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR THIS INSURGENT. MAY ANYBODY YOU WANT TO SAY HELLO TO. YES, WANT TO SAY HELLO TO MY FAMILY, MY FRIENDS, MY LIFE INTO GUY LEFT ON YOU KNOW SERGEANT MAY BEFORE YOU GO, I HAVE SOMEONE WHO WOULD LIKE TO SAY HELLO TO YOU. BEEN DEACTIVATED AND OH, THERE IT MEAN, OUT AND GIVING IT JENNA. STARTED MY COMPANY. I KNOW THAT MOM AND DAD. WHAT DOES IT MEAN TO SEE, YOU KNOW, BE ABLE TO CHECK IN AND DO THIS LITTLE SURPRISE. I'M HOLDING BACK TEARS RIGHT IT'S GREAT ONE OF SMALL MOMENTS WHEN DON'T GET DON'T GET TO DO THIS OFTEN. SO ANYTIME YOU GET A CHANCE TO CONNECT WITH IS PARTICULARLY FAMILY IN THIS CASE MILITARY. ALWAYS GREAT AS SAID, THAT CONDITION THE FAMILY WAYS THIS HUGE AND MOM AND DAD. I I THINK THAT PEOPLE THINK COME ON. SHE'S SHE'S IN THE MILITARY. SHE'S SHE'S A FULL-GROWN ADULT. YOU ALWAYS BE YOUR BABY. ONE OF THE THINGS WE TALK ABOUT TOO, IS HOW GOOD IT IS TO HEAR FROM FAMILY MEMBERS WHEN THEY'RE STATIONED OVERSEAS. I KNOW THAT SHE'S ALWAYS TOP OF MIND FOR YOU. BUT CAN SPREAD THE WORD OF CHEER TO OTHER FAMILIES WHO MAY HAVE A LOVED 1 STATIONED OVERSEAS RIGHT NOW. WHAT IS YOUR WORD OF ENCOURAGEMENT FOR THEM. A LOT, OK TO THEM. EVEN APPLE BE HAPPY TO BE GRATEFUL. YOU HAVE A FAMILY MEMBER WHO'S OUT THERE PROTECTING THE NATION. WE'RE TAKING OUR FREEDOM. WE HAVE BEEN GRATEFUL. WE HAVE PEOPLE SAME. WE HAVE BEEN GRATEFUL YOU HAVE A CASE LIKE THAT. WE ARE SAFE BECAUSE THEY EVEN THOUGH THEY ARE IN THE MILITARY. IT COULD HAVE MUCH WORSE LOCATION WHEN TIME OF THEY WERE THEY WANT TO BE. BUT FORTUNATELY FOR US AND FOR THEM DOING A GREAT PLACE. SO VERY HAPPY FOR THAT. SO IF YOU'RE IF YOU WERE IF YOU'RE UP, SAID THERE'S A FAMILY MEMBER IS NOT AT HOME. TAKE TAKE SOLACE. TAKE THINGS IN THE FACT THEY ARE IN A PLACE WHERE THEY'RE SAFE. THE PLACE THEY CAN HAVE PLACE THERE WITH BROTHERS AND SISTERS IN ARMS AND THEY'RE THEY'RE STILL LOVED ONES. THEY STILL HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY TO TALK TO BE AROUND. SO IT COULD HAVE BEEN SOMETHING WORSE THAN WHAT I WAS IN. WE DO HAVE VIDEO CALLS. SO THIS RIGHT HERE FOR|||Over 500,000 refugees from 125 countries
have already found safety in Poland. Polish borders are open to all
refugees fleeing Russian aggression. You can find the link to guidelines for all refugees in the
description of this video. Poland decided to accept all nationalities right
from the beginning of the conflict in Ukraine Poland is ramping up its efforts to
support refugees fleeing Russian aggression On the Polish
side of the border, hundreds of people wait in long line
to offer transportation to those in need. There are currently hundreds, if not
thousands of initiatives designed to help people inside Ukraine
and the ones who flee the war. Poland created a dedicated website
established to coordinate all the support and provide vital information
for those in need. Despite all these efforts,
there is a substantial number of outlets reporting false information
regarding Poland. Reports suggest Poland is blocking various
nationalities from fleeing war in Ukraine. This is false and hurtful. What we're seeing now is a mix of miscommunication, Putin's propaganda
and just lazy journalism, I guess. Here's the example I
recently stumbled upon. BBC News heartbreaking story about Gabriel, a Nigerian student
fleeing war through Poland. And Gabriel, you were telling me a little bit earlier about what happened to you
when you were trying to board onto the trains. What was your experience
of trying to get out of Ukraine? It was a very terrible experience for me. Like last ten days in Ukraine was very difficult for me
as I was expecting the military. They were very mean. They were just too mean to us. No humans, no food, nothing, no support. It was just on your own. All they said was "go to your embassy". If your embassy is not there,
the rest is up to you. And this was in Lviv. Just to clarify, this was in Lviv. So how did you get
to the border with Poland? Yeah, we walked for like 12
hours from Lviv to Poland. We walked for like 12 hours. Also mine was like 12
hours with no food and nothing. You just have to and then when you got to the border,
what happened to you? What did you see? That was one of my worst experience. The soldiers
on duty that it was mean. They were just so heartless. They treated us like animals totally. There were no human sympathy in any of them. There were some who did come around those places, the soldiers, the borders. We saw some of them with some
weapons that we tried to make. So just understand that we are seeing
these weapons and he said we should go and there's nothing you can do about it
and we're like we can risk our life. So they started chasing
us away, hitting us. You can see that he hit my leg. The reaction on Twitter, to quote just a few:
"Poles are only allowing white people in" "Polish border guards are racist" This made me sick. Millions of Poles are helping war refugees
of all nationalities on daily basis. There's a lot of things you can say about Poland but the way we've conducted
ourselves during this crisis, during this war is definitely
something we should be proud of. So I reached out to BBC
to confront them about the story. Thanks to your support,
they've noticed my comment and decided to replace their 40-second
video with a longer one. The longer video allowed
Gabriel to finish his story. You can see that he hit my leg right here. Gabriel, when you got over the border, then when you were in that bit coming
up to the Polish part, what happened? Yeah, Polish. They were nice to me. At least they worked on me. Give you food. I had one or two conversations
with you, a little bit of relief. I feel like I'm accepted again. thank you so much
for sharing your experience. Thank you so much for talking. Now this is pure example of how easy it is to
manipulate information to divide people. 40-second version of the video about Polish
border and Poles are racist bunch who are providing help exclusively
to white refugees. Full two minute version of the video and Poles are heroes providing help
to all regardless of their nationality. Unfortunately, more and more news
outlets are making similar mistakes. Here's another example where popular French media outlet La Figaro displayed
a map of countries supporting Ukraine. Poland was excluded despite our country being a front line of support
to the Ukrainian people. After confronting reporters, they've updated the map to include
Poland as well as the Baltic countries. Yet another story includes a BBC live
broadcast that suggests that some of the Putin's planes were
stationed inside Poland. Yeah, I mean inside NATO country,
which is obviously false. I'm sure this is not an example of Putin's
propaganda, but yet another mistake. This is why in the difficult times like
this, it is so vital to be precise in the way we communicate
specifically journalists. This is why we all need
to fact-check and verify. You can find links to fact-checking
tutorials in the description below. Activists at the border confirm various
nationalities find safe haven in Poland. This includes a popular
Spanish-American chef, José Andrés. So guys, I'm here
with Jennifer from Nigeria. I just met her here. She's been walking like many others for many hours, if not many days because
the situation is difficult to leave Ukraine to come, because no cars,
no gas and many other issues, I guess. But I was asking her because they were
saying that if Poland and other countries were not allowing citizens from different
countries, especially of Africa. And what do you have
to tell us about that? We didn't actually face
any problem coming here. We just got to the border and then we just had stamped our visas and everything. So I met some people from Congo with her. I saw some people from Jamaica. I saw people from India from different
countries around the world. But I've seen people from different
countries in Africa and I agree with her. Everyone tell me no problem. So don't worry. We're trying to do the government
of Poland and other governments. They are trying to do their best
to take care of the people. Thank you for sharing this with you. And best of luck. People from all over the World appreciate Poland's help to refugees fleeing the war
this includes an inspirational story of Indian refugees fleeing
Russian aggression. When the Soviet Union invaded Poland, an Indian Prince gave refuge to thousands
of Polish children escaping gulags. His Navanagar came to be
called Little Poland. Tonight, 80 years later,
Poland returned the favor. Thank you Adam Burakowsky. India won't forget this. He mentioned Adam Burkowsky,
ambassador of Poland to India. So just to clarify, I'm not
trying to say it's all perfect. When 1 million people flee war, we can
see what's best and worst about humanity. It is not surprising to hear about
violence, racism, bribery, looting. There's no justification for this. And we should prosecute
all those responsible. That being said, these dark episodes
should not define who we are. Ukrainians are defined for their
unprecedented bravery. They are an inspiration to whole free World. Poles are defined through millions
of people providing meaningful help on daily basis to refugees
of all nationalities. Right now more than ever, we need to stand together rather than
to look for reasons stand apart.|||yo bois See me? No? let START Ooooo boiieeeeeeee Gotta go f a s t o hei wanna-- Agh 𝗔𝗪𝗘𝗦𝗢𝗠𝗘 𝘽𝙖𝙣𝙂𝘽𝙣𝙖𝙂𝙣𝙗𝘼𝙣 rip paganism statues scary *getting some territories* ded 🎱 *drop* *crown appear* :O ᴅᴀᴛ ʙᴇᴀᴜᴛɪғᴜʟ :3 Uhh...? █▀▀ █░░ █▀▀█ █▀▀█
▀▀█ █░░ █▄▄█ █░░█
▀▀▀ ▀▀▀ ▀░░▀ █▀▀▀ 🅰️*suprised* HA HA HA HA H∀ S H U T  U P 𝕜𝕟𝕚𝕗𝕖 𝕚𝕟 𝕜𝕟𝕚𝕗𝕖 𝕠𝕦𝕥 eXistential cries *cough* 𝘙𝘶𝘜𝘜𝘶𝘜𝘶𝘮 wtf rook? oh Yes :o ∀∀∀∀∀∀∀∀∀ 1 ÷ 7 🎱 🎱 🎱 You want something betch? O k ǝ ǝ ǝ [thinking] ʷᵃᶦᵗ Wʰᵃ ? *plum* ᗪYIᑎG ᑕᑌTEᒪY [hungry Teutonic Order appaer] 0h its only butter knife *But its too much to day* 🅰️ [magnification with a microscope, u can see atoms now] r^{2}={\frac {b^{2}}{1-e^{2}\cos ^{2}\theta }}={\frac {a^{2}b^{2}}{a^{2}sin^{2}\theta +b^{2}cos^{2}\theta }},} O ʙᴏɪ Y A O O 𝘙 𝘶 𝘯    𝘯 𝘰 𝘸 [expanding territories] What is wrong with YUUUuu just St00*8P hammer pain ded take some lands put Oh BO̵̖̤͕͉͙̮̔̃̍̿͝Ĩ́ͩͧ̈́̓ͪ͌͆ͪ̑ͮ͒͋́ͬ
ͮ̐ͤ̿̀̃ͣͭ͐ͧ̏ͩ̿͋ͫ
͇̤͍̹͇͇ͅ Freinds? want union? 🆗 Lithuania get christianization O LES GOooOo Teutonic.mp4 *supriese* ∀∀∀∀A∀∀∀∀ ded die more A̵̱̜̪̳ Run for help study *pop* huusar +100 to strong, + 100 to attack +1000 to pierogi WhAt is wrong with Y∩o??! Well, Fak u [̲̅2] fight scene O h0 Ho ho H0h Oh Bo𝙸 O ＳＨＵＴ ＵＰ ! *bump x2* pants away *teleport* horse time Oooo looking around *camera movement* wo B0i OU woosh Hy *flip* fake a͈̪̹͑ͨ́̚A͓̰̫͊ͣ̋ͨĂͤ͛ͫ̀A͙͛̌̌ͮ̌ͧ͂ run horse back *crickets* Ooₒ happ days >:( Enouggh of thes sheet slap α ruun Yuo SICK ' fight theme Russia escape AGhaha IM GONNA BURN 𝓲𝓶 𝓰𝓸𝓷𝓷𝓪 【B】【U】【R】【N】 Ahahaha 🚫 pls burn B̶̨̦̦̘̻͓͚͋̈̈́͆͐̾̈́͜ͅR̸͖̳̥͇̉̾̈́̃͝͝U̵̙̝̟͕̓̈́̐̏̚Ǹ̴̗̥̃̉͋́͘͝Ì̵̢̧̨̝̜̰̗͐N̶̜̠͖̭̫͎͈̓͆͂̈́̒͘͝G̴̩̼̯̲̳̪̫̪̞͙̃̇̈́̾̓̑͂͠G̷̘͙̭͉͔̤̬͒̉̾̔̑G̸̮͈̜̓̀G̴̡̛̻̹̥̩͑̒͛̌̈́̍́̕͜ reverse card hit x3 ATLEAST bump 𝙶𝙴𝚃 𝙾𝚄𝚃 so quiet... oh look this mustache W H ∀ T?! WHAT u 𝚆𝚊𝚗𝚝 AAA∀∀∀AA∀A∀ *pop* bai carton sound oj boi a TÜrk NEDİR? *magic* TADA🎉🎉 Y E E T Great Northern War start [remove lego] [remove pierogi] [remove nuts] [remove vodka?] oof snowman You think y re a strong bOi, BUTT I am S̲ ̲ T̲ ̲ R̲  ̲O̲ ̲ N̲  ̲G̲  ̲E̲  ̲R̲ ɐɐɐɐɐɐɐɐɐ hmm door knock knock knock Open THE door open The DOOOR hey open the door plz OK *bump* CO?? WHat Yu want??!! :c cake party 🅰️ munch Ą̸̺̣͕̃̀̍
Ą̸̺̣͕̃̀̍
Ą̸̺̣͕̃̀̍ *panic* N̡̳͙̹̞̟̜̂ͩ͐̈ͣ̌ͦ̍ͩ̈ͮ̇ͧͮ̂̂ͯͤ̕͜Ó̸̶̷͕̜̟͎̞̭̲̬̘͓̜̮̹̺͂̏ͩ̒̇͊̋́̂Ồ̸̴̹̣͈̞̯̬̣̲͇͊͐ͥ̌̍̅ͦ̓̉̐ͣ̂͊͡Ò͕̲̫͖͎̪̠̖͉̟̣̪̝̼̞̺̝̹ͯ̒̍ͦ̌̐ͭ̈́͟O̸̢̲̭̱͖̳͔̬ͭ͋͗̽ͥͮ̈ͥͭ̏̌͋́ͬͩ̎̀̂͘Ȱ̶̡̦̮̤̫̥̹̫̮͕̻̺̑̈́͗̅̊͊ͪͨ͑ͥͨ̈ͬ̚͘͝͞Ȯ̟̝͕͙̟̪͉̖̳̜͈̰̖̟̮̼͗̓̀ͬ̎̽͆̎̊͠Ơ̝̜̲̤̼̥͕̭̟͎̠̗̗͗̐͑ͣƠ̵̡̛̬͓͉̬͗͛̐ͮ̃͐̔̊̏͒͋ͮ̎̈́͆̌̇̏̎Ő̵̰͓̬͈͇̮͕̳͚̟̾̿͆̉̇̈̒̇̆̀͠O̴̳͖̭̯̲̻̳͉̰̞̩̠͎̲̪̤̰ͨͯ̄͛͂̍̕͘͟͜Ö̯͓͉͙̙̰͈̦̘͇̬͍͖͔̣̗̻͈́̃ͫͨ̓ͯ̊̓̆͗̚͟͠Ô̈̐̈́̊̋͏҉҉̮̠̤̫̪ counterattack 1795 rip *baguette* [Poland back] *snowball cannon appear* *Screams in French* magic I want to be independent NO bonk 🔨 ded WWI ends Dropping Polen getting territories 🗞️ [- Poznań] bump [- Wilno] ♟ anvil 1000 attack 200iq [use helm] wtf hacker? [- Kresy Wschodnie] Whaa YOU 𝚆𝙰𝙽𝚃?!! ∀∀∀ Playing lego huh? :((( 𝙸 𝚠𝚊𝚗𝚝 𝚋𝚎 𝙸𝚗𝚜𝚙𝚎𝚍𝚎𝚗𝚝 bonk BOOOM ded 【c】【r】【y】 【u】 【l】【i】【t】 【b】【i】【t】【c】【h】 🔨 🔨🔨 *pop* whoosh small whoosh POLSKA into space :D RUN! (go 𝐒    𝐏    𝐀    𝐂    𝐄) and Yes Poland was in S    P    A    C    E  (1978) how could you not see? ree DAS                  it                          ENOUCH no more comunism in Poland baii ey nato sup? joing NATO ey eu sup? joining EU O Boooie *pop* new door? hope no partitions again bump {famous SR PELO scream} ⓢⓞⓜⓔ ⓘⓝⓕⓞⓢ ↶You can check description for more info↷ FIN? yes i needed few seconds to 5min video ;) Sub?|||in recent days poland has witnessed an unprecedented event in its modern history the migration crisis on the polish belarusian border is the first clear example for polish society of a change in the structure of the global order polish political elites so far preoccupied mainly with internal power struggles were mercilessly awakened from their geostrategic sleep why did lukashenko cause a crisis on his own border what scenarios are possible and what does the new polish army have to do with all this welcome to the 20s report [Music] border crisis war is a tool for achieving political goals in this sense a traditional kinetic war such as world war ii is no different than a hybrid war fought locally and with relatively few resources hybrid war or to be more precise hybrid conflict for this is how all actions below the official threshold of war are defined includes among others social activities weaponization of migrants information warfare and the activities of special forces and or paramilitary groups the world has observed such actions since at least 2014 the era of russia's aggression against the ukraine the next iteration of this form of political pressure is taking place now through the precipitation of a migrant crisis by the republic of belarus in mid-2021 the belarusian regime headed by alexander lukashenko launched a new migration channel at first the target was lithuania but after some time the belarusian authorities redirected the inflow to the polish border on november the 8th 2021 events escalated with several thousand and possibly more migrants being transported to the brewski kuznetsov border crossing interestingly a few days earlier on november the 5th at the meeting of the council of the union state of russia and belarus the two countries signed a package of integration agreements it assumes among other things the adoption by russia and belarus of a common migration policy and military doctrine this fact together with statements made by high-ranking russian politicians confirmed alexander lukashenko's belief that his actions have the full support of moscow one might ask why lukashenko needs a conflict on the border now the answer may seem simple it's clear that minsk's actions are a form of revenge by lukashenko against poland lithuania and the european union in general for supporting the belarusian opposition after the 2020 elections as well as for the sanctions imposed on his regime it is almost certain however that belarus's hybrid actions are above all part of the internal belarusian russian game with belarus acting as moscow's political bumper while it pursues its goals of destabilizing the eu's and nato's eastern flank as well as ukraine in fact the recent number of coinciding events is puzzling on november the 8th the data crisis escalated the lenergo a belarusian energy company announced that it was immediately breaking its contract to supply electricity to ukraine at a time when the country is currently experiencing an acute energy crisis perhaps there would be nothing surprising about this were it not for the fact that deliveries had begun only seven days earlier what's more moscow had recently stopped deliveries of gas through the yamal pipeline which runs through belarus and poland and on to germany and the eu although lukashenko boasts that belarus will buy gas from russia at prices several times lower than those paid by european countries blocking yamal will effectively cut off belarus from revenues generated by gas transit which gives the kremlin another tool to pressure lukashenko there is also speculation in the press about the dislocation of nuclear weapons to belarus and about extending the lease of two military facilities for another 25 years on the other hand belarus still does not formally recognize the annexation of crimea which russia considers a slap in the face although lukashenko makes it clear that informally this has already happened the kremlin expects a formal stance from him despite the seemingly friendly relations between minsk and moscow we were in fact dealing with a constant game of smiles and declarations in the foreground while in the background a merciless struggle for efficiency and political maneuvering is taking place it is likely that destabilization of the polish border is an additional tool for lukashenko to use in his maneuvers with moscow for example unleashing a crisis and allowing moscow to be the final arbiter may be traded for resumption of russian gas transportation through yamal the escalation of the border crisis is in the interest of the russian federation which treats it as part of its bullying strategy and as a form of pressure on western states while formally not bearing any responsibility for it the migration crisis fuels social and political discord in poland and tests the resilience of poland's security system its armed forces and nato as a whole information warfare one of the most important domains in any modern conflict including this current border crisis is the infosphere it is not important what happens on the ground what matters is the message that goes out to the world whoever wins the narrative war is the de facto winner of the entire game the russian and bella russian authorities report that the west is responsible for causing the migration because it supported american moves in the middle east the belarusian side and the russian language media accuse the polish state of inhumane actions and of violating human rights these include the forcible detention of migrants forcing their way across the border and the use of tear gas to repel the assault all of this is most often fueled by images of women and children appearing online this narrative is being joined by some political circles in poland who are calling for the admission of those camping at the border which is in line with the goals of belarusian propaganda the question that needs to be asked at this point is are we dealing with a humanitarian disaster now according to the european court on human rights poland must provide food clothing medical care and if possible temporary shelter to migrants camped at their border however belarus refuses to allow poland to send a convoy into its territory with humanitarian aid for migrants thus refusing to provide assistance besides it is clear that all people who received a visa to belarus first had to prove that they had sufficient funds for accommodation in normal life functions in belarus the price that migrants had to pay to smugglers approved by the lukashenko regime according to various media leaks ranges anywhere from 2500 to 15 000 the lukashenko regime sees this money in order to use these people instrumentally for its own game when the first people realized that they were victims of fraud they tried to return to the airport but the belarusian police turned back cabs transporting migrants this culminated in the belarusian authorities transporting these migrants to the border and then cutting off their way back in a word middle eastern migrants are now prisoners and hostages of lukashenko who plays with human lives to achieve his own political goals belarus used to operate several dozens of flights per week from dubai baghdad damascus beirut and importantly from istanbul and antalya this would not have been possible without the tacit approval of turkey holden's ally within nato whereas poland and turkey recently signed an agreement for the delivery of turkish baryaktar tb2 unmanned aerial vehicles worth over a quarter billion dollars the turkish ministry of foreign affairs denies that it supports lukashenko's smuggling activities but it is likely that polish-turkish relations will be damaged as a result as expected eu and nato countries reacted very differently to the crisis on their eastern border although lukashenko's actions have been condemned at the declaratory level and a fifth package of sanctions has been announced their impact is likely to be reduced relative to the initial intentions for example one of the sanctions is to exclude bellavia the state-controlled belarusian air carrier from the market for aircraft leasing contracts now this would effectively ground their aircraft because it would force minsk to buy them back for which it has no money however ireland where most of the providers of such services are located opposed the scenario proposing that sanctions be imposed only on new leasing contracts another idea was to exclude belarus from the global agreement on aviation data sharing but here too the lukashenko regime is preparing to get around that by creating a common aviation space with russia and a joint administration to manage it it's not difficult to guess that declarative support comes mainly from berlin one should remember that poland is only another stop on the way to germany so the polish buffer for the germans is very useful in this case although now the german media report that single groups of migrants from the direction of belarus have found their way to germany just as importantly the current game can be costly for belarus and russia a sudden influx of thousands of migrants destabilizes the situation in belarus if lukashenko does not bring the situation under control his legitimacy in the eyes of many influential people in his own regime's departments who in practice ensure his power may decrease the sanctions package imposed on belarus has not resulted in a freeze of trade on the contrary as belsat reports in the first nine months of this year trade with eu countries has increased by more than 40 percent and is now back to pre-pandemic levels the main trade partners of the republic of belarus remained germany and poland therefore a complete closure of the border with poland would be a real blow to minsk it would be equally costly for moscow since the main land route connecting russia with the european union runs through belarus added to that there is a dry cargo port moushaviche on the border with belarus this is the largest dry port in europe hundreds of trains from east and central asia are bound for it as part of the chinese belt and road initiative moashevich handles 90 of all goods brought from china to europe by rail if belarus climbs up the escalation ladder warsaw may take steps to close this artery this would certainly be met with a reaction from moscow and potentially even from beijing now it should also be remembered that the nordstream 2 gas pipeline which is crucial for the kremlin remains inoperable although it is very close to completion it is still a potential disciplinary tool in the hands of the west poland effectively guards the border so further steps up the escalation ladder by the republic of belarus are likely this may include provocations with weapons interestingly in the russian city of kazan the forces of the collective security treaty organization or russian nato are practicing protecting a refugee camp and exporting convoys with humanitarian cargo it is therefore possible that after a series of escalations vladimir putin will suddenly enter the game introduce russian guards to the border and present himself to the world as a stabilizer of the situation which will be welcomed with relief and even gratitude by western countries such a reaction in moscow will be taken as a success and confirmation that this type of policy brings the intended results the media reports that angela merkel has already made the first call to putin asking for help in solving this crisis on the border the end of strategic sleep the november crisis on the border was preceded by another very important event in poland perhaps even a breakthrough ending the period of strategic sleep in which polish policymakers have been stuck since the 1990s the leader of the law and justice party deputy prime minister yaroslav kaczynski who in practice is now the most influential politician in the country held a press conference about the fracturing of the world order hybrid war and russia's offensive posture he also pointed out the limited ability of nato to help poland in a new generation war which may last only a few days or weeks so by the time nato troops or the americans to be precise come to help it could already be over thus he stressed the need for poland's military autonomy which is not manifested itself in the views of the ruling party so far in response to these challenges kaczynski announced that poland must be able to defend itself and for this purpose it needs a large army perhaps several times larger than the current army of about a hundred thousand active duty troops and another fifty thousand reservists expert and strategic environments although they welcomed kaczynski's assessment of the situation immediately raised the question how much will a majorly beefed up polish military cost a well-equipped army of 250 to 300 000 for such of the estimates being given in the media would be a huge burden on the polish national budget it's all the more doubtful since poland despite currently allocating quite a large amount of money for defense its defense budget is comparable to that of israel or of turkey has an army with much smaller capabilities increasing the number of personnel which due to demographics is already difficult will only further dilute these capabilities grassroots polish think tanks are pushing for a debate on this issue and demand a very conscientious reform process so as not to throw big money down the drain although the outlook on the reform of the armed forces is not uniform all experts agree that a modern army should first of all have a high saturation of capabilities it is not the quantity but the quality of units that is most important according to the swedish military think tank foi despite the fact that the polish army presents a certain value on nato's eastern flank it suffers from low personnel and poor quality of the equipment used according to foi up to 75 of it is obsolete therefore declarations of a 250 000 strong army are simply unrealistic at the moment however a correct assessment of the situation is the first step towards useful change an unexpected side effect of the belarusian-induced migration crisis which is at least declaratively supported by russia may be an increase in public support for the idea of reforming the polish army conflict on the border is a reminder of the ruthlessness of the relationship between states for the last 30 years living under the american and eu umbrella in a unipolar world polish elites as well as its society at large have forgotten about this principle nothing is a given forever a modern military capable of protecting the state's interests is the foundation of the nation's functions and relations this was the 20th report as some of you know i'm polish so the events discussed in the video are quite close to me and whether i like it or not i'm exposed to the media operations in this area however i have tried to present the topic in the least biased way if that's even possible thank you for your attention today and see you next time [Music] you|||yo what's going on guys my name is MI from Poland I'm here with Chris AKA Rudy Rudy he's from the UK and today we're going to be reacting to why Poland is quietly becoming Europe's next superpower all right so this is a bit different to the kind of stuff that we normally do um but we wanted to sort of delve into some other some other stuff about Poland um we we were looking at sort of some football some football related stuff some history related stuff and we thought you know what this is a good subject um and it's stuff that I've seen happening recently as well like Poland is you know the their military might cuz they because they're soose to Russia and stuff like that and um you know even when we've been there and and because I've been there twice this year it's you can see that it's just becoming you know better better exactly some people might disagree so let us know also comment on I was going to say comment down below what town you're from just curious if someone goes Leicester or something then I'm going to be from Bogner reg just no um yeah let's get straight into it this is the classic stereotype of Poland a gray poor postcommunist country with nothing to offer but cheap unqualified labor but this stereotype is no longer true and Poland of today looks more like this in the past 30 years Poland went through an incredible transformation growing more than any other economy in Europe and faster than Asian tigers like Singapore South Korea or Taiwan today Poland is emerging as a major technological Hub the Polish economy might overtake the UK by 2030 and after years of suffering from a massive brain drain highly skilled poles are now coming back home and it goes Way Beyond the I need to go back home yeah I don't think they're talking about you they said big brains big brains ex you left the brains went up if I come back I'm they're going to make a video why Poland is quietly not yeah why why Poland is not deining unknown reason why it's declining economy as Poland is building one of the most powerful militaries in Europe and quickly becoming one of the most influential European countries as all of these changes continue to pick up pace it's getting impossible to ignore Poland's growing importance but there is still one thing that could destroy the entire polish Miracle a threat not from the outside but from within so how did Poland manage to become Europe's biggest success story this guy set up the story he's like it's not Russia it's from within why is it doing so much better than everyone else and what is the challenge threatening to end everything that it has achieved this R very dramatic the [Music] rise but first a word from the sponsor of this video blink anyway um we'll skip that sponsor thanks for the video thanks thanks for the sponsor and now back to the video but to understand why Bin's transformation is such a big stand there weren't we I'm pretty sure we took a picture like down here or something like that yeah was it here yeah yeah we walked in into that part there or was it this bit we did it over in the park bit it was something like that no no no no no I mean no we recorded the short there yeah yeah yeah if if you guys haven't seen the short it's on the channel we recorded a short literally right down here um ear this year to be fair we went all around there bro yeah yeah yeah we need to understand where it started from in the 20th century after becoming the first country to be invaded by Nazi Germany and L 20% of its population in World War II Poland became part of the Eastern block as one of the Soviet controlled satellite States like in the rest of the Eastern block the 40 Years of Communism were times of deep economic isolation stagnation and overall I couldn't imagine sorry um I couldn't imagine like going like back in the day when there was like nothing on the shelves you know you'd go to get bread and like potentially these days is too much like I feel like we have too much on on on on on on the shelves like they throw stuff away I remember even here they throw literally boxes of drinks away and stuff like that when when it's not get sold and it's just it's just waste but hopelessness had to import the Soviet system of centrally planned economy where state owned almost everything private businesses were mostly non-existent and since they were basically a Soviet Colony the Polish economy was subservient to interests of the Soviet Union and forced to make Buy and sell whatever Moscow wanted it to whether it made economic sense or not as a result the centrally plant economy was deeply disfunction average Polish person today were average smiling Polish person back the back in the day we was already already given the Polish smile was deeply dysfunctional and mismanaged crippled by constant shortages of basic goods and lack of resources when the Communist regimes of Eastern Europe finally fell in 1989 and Poland became free free and independent it emerged from behind the Iron Curtain as one of the poorest countries in Europe with highly dysfunctional infrastructure and public services and with basically no experience with where start as like a as like a government where do you even start to like recover from something like that all your people are just un not are not highly educated there's no jobs no I mean that's not their fault it's the fault of the Soviet Union we've always been highly educated shut up and and this from a non-educated wasn't right here anyway Mari cier was the first woman to that wasn't during the Soviet Union you donut doesn't matter I'm talking about us being Highly Educated okay we're talking about look at me we're talk can you stop talking about yourself for a moment we're we're talking about years like Decades of being under Soviet Union control like where did you even start from that that that's probably why everyone left and started coming to countries like this America and stuff yeah and participating in a global economy the average salary was 10 times lower than in Germany and the country was struggling with hyperinflation in other words it wasn't a country you would bet on to become a major success but skip 30 years ahead into the future and that's exactly what happened so how did Poland do it from 1992 Poland managed to grow consecutively for almost three decades achieving the longest period of growth in modern European history now not many countries are able to do that and the reason is that usually when they find successful strategy they tend to stick to it long after it stops working but Poland so far managed to find a different growth strategy for each of the three decades which allowed it to grow so fast for so long starting in the early 1990s its main challenge like in every other post-communist country was how to transition from a centralized state-owned economy to a capitalist one in most countries these transitional reforms were in one way or another quite problematic either they took too long or they became pretty corrupt and bu of the state wealth was transferred into hands of a few wealthy oligarchs who got rich because of their political connections Poland on the other hand it's always like that it's always like there's some rich people they getting power and then they they take away the money for themselves they corrupt it and they make it worse for everyone below but it doesn't seem like based on what he's saying it doesn't seem like that's what happened in Poland because you do hear about Russian oligarchs and Ukrainian oligarchs who own so much and have so much money um and they're basically in charge of the country but I feel like it happens everywhere you feel like that's in Poland as well surely come on man yeah but I but what I mean is is like if that is the case it doesn't seem like it's affected the economy of the country in itself where it has countries like Ukraine and it's interesting because I don't know I hear lots of different opinions right um about Poland in general like from this video it looks like Poland's doing amazing and stuff but when I'm listening to some people they they don't think it's doing that well so guys us know that's why that's why this video has some dislikes as well I mean people will disagree with the situation and they will say no well for me it's not like that but if you're yourself living where you are now and you ask your parents who moved away from from Poland surely they would look back now and they would go it's probably much better than it was true and manage this transition arguably better than others it transitioned to capitalism quickly but privatized most of the state-owned companies slowly and a few years later than most of its neighbors after the chaos calmed down and after it became a little bit harder to steal everything thanks to that it became pretty much the only post-communist country without an economy dominated by oligarchs and without an economic crash in the 1990s but despite the Good Start in the early 2000s this wasn't enough anymore in order to grow and so the next phase was about globalization in 2004 Poland joined the European Union and the open European market with a free movement of goods and services without any barriers between Poland and the rest of Europe it made sense for Western European companies to move their manufacturing over to Poland where they had a large and a very cheap pool of workers at their disposal and while these companies kept most of the profit Poland got enough out of it to keep growing at a pretty fast pace and joining the EU brought another major benefit since one of its ke principles is redistribution yeah sharing and stuff so if Poland was down here and every other country was up here you know it's going to balance itself out for Poland this was good yeah but you say but Greece for instance um went bankrupt and it brought like the Euro down as a whole for instance and stuff like that and even even though that even though they were sort of part of the EU um maybe it didn't work out for yeah I mean it doesn't work out for everyone but I think in Poland's case it's different because they joined for a reason to be able to join like globally and stuff I don't know the full history yeah of money from wealthier member states to the less developed ones in order to balance the wealth disparity across the union after joining the Eastern European states started to receive a lot of money and Poland managed to use them to build and improve everything from roads to universities and again in a lot more efficient way than in many other Eastern European I think for sure roads have improved since like when I was there even just recently I was actually making a joke to everyone cuz I was like with people in the car and I kept making a joke like oh there's a bridge being built over there and like I said it once right and then I just kept making it a joke like every time there was a bridge being built I was like there's another bridge and like it was just like at one point I was like how many bridges are being built in like roads and everything it was like that when we were in warsa there's so much building going on there's so much development yeah like and it was crazy I when I used used to drive to my grandma's house right um from my dad's side bcha yeah bap's house um he used to take me take us about 4 hours now it would take about 2 hours really so they've just made like I guess they made tunnels and bridges and blah blah blah to make it much easier yeah highways highways yeah countries but that can still only take you as far in many countries following a similar trajectory eventually fall into the so-called middle inome trap if your economy is based on providing cheap labor for foreign companies you can only grow to a certain level and if you can't offer anything else apart from that and you don't have any major companies of your own you're stuck but so far Poland seems to be avoiding that 15 years ago foreign companies were coming in to hire low-skilled and low paid workers for menial labor but today they're coming because Poland has one of the largest pools of engineering talent in Europe and instead of where bro I'm telling you so many of my cousin friends all engineers and developers software developers and I I didn't know that PO had such a big movement on that side like I didn't I haven't heard of any even the teeken Warsaw apparently is crazy though like um and there's well I don't know if there's a lot of jobs but I think so it sounds like it B based on this video but I mean he but he's going to tell us what's going to bring Poland down soon warehouses and basic factories companies like Google are opening search and development hubs now that said Poland is still relatively poor at least compared with most of Western Europe but the growth so far has been impressive and unusually inclusive average wages in the country massively increased while inequality remained low and so it's not a growth that would only exist on paper or only help select few but it actually trickled down to the rest of the society and there's one more area outside of economic growth where Poland has been getting a lot of attention lately and that's milary also just before we go into the military I just wanted to highlight like when I've recently been to Poland and the the people that I've spoke to I feel like I don't know even just looking at like how much they were able to like go out and buy like we was going to like restaurants yeah and I was thinking this is quite expensive whilst I was bringing pounds right um and these guys were like yeah we can go out like eat once a week in a nice restaurant like stuff like that and I'm thinking you know that that's a good sign right um and also like clothes wise and what what um what jobs they're performing and how much they're earning not everyone was telling me that but some of the closer friends and stuff yeah um there's definitely a difference there there definitely it felt like everyone was living fairly um okay but then but then but then you but then you can feel that here as well can't you you can feel that here but then you can you can go out down the street and see a homeless person or you can go and find people that aren't living well and stuff like that yeah it's it's obviously different based on different people and stuff um yeah but but but let's see what the military say it's unprecedented military buildup historically Poland has some good reasons to be a little paranoid Stu between Germany and Russia it has been invaded partitioned colonized and stripped of its independence time and time again and even though today it's in NATO this historical memory is still there and while most European countries were taking their peace dividends Poland has kept military funding at one of the highest levels in NATO and after the Russian invasion of Ukraine it went into an overdrive it announced that in just a few years it will increase its military spending to 5% of its GDP higher than any other NATO member double the size of its Armed Forces to 300,000 and buy thousands of Tanks fighter jets and other military equipment and before the end of the decade Poland plans to have the most powerful ground forces in Europe in what would be one of the most ambitious military buildups in modern European history now that being said what Poland has achieved so far is impressive and what it plans to achieve is that kov or g g SC I see this is the thing I've seen a street in kov that has a tunnel like this at the end no it's not like that though yeah I know what one you're talking about um no this is din we got a picture there as well is it what right here yeah yeah yeah damn I we need to go back to put in again even more so but it's yet to be seen if all that will actually happen despite its successes there are some significant risks that could kill the entire polish miracle and not everyone is so bullish on Poland's future for a long time demography has been considered the number one threat as around half a million people have left the country in the last 30 years but now it looks like Poland managed to reverse this trend in recent years it has seen a what was it this place that whiskey in a jaw I remember we had food at this place in GL but I don't know if it was this one or if they no it was it was next to the river right yeah yeah first brain drain as poles and people with Polish Heritage living abroad have started coming back to the country and since the country tooken over 1 and a half million Ukrainian refugees the demographic TRS are looking much better and so there are really two major risks first while the growth has been impressive Poland has not actually avoided the middle income trap completely so far it's still massively reliant on foreign investments and although tech centers are being opened in Warsaw they are set up by Foreign companies rather than by polish yeah I knew this so much of it so this is what what what it's saying is maybe is that Poland needs its own companies it needs its own spill like needs its own Googles and Samsungs and whatever's um built up but then how do you I feel like it's difficult in a market like that to be able to bring something in and have it dominate when you've got so many other massive companies that dominate everything else um I mean I'm I'm sure it come there are some there are some ones and while that brings jobs and growth once again there is a limit to how high you can grow since most of the profits will always end up leaving the country in the end in order to break into the big leagues you need your own domestic Giants in sectors with high eded value and Poland doesn't have that or at least not yet but the far bigger risk is of a completely different nature and it concerns a part of the Polish story that we haven't touched on yet the thing is that Poland is a deeply deeply divided country so much that we can almost talk about two different polands one liberal and Progressive and the other deeply conservative and religious like in the US the two that is I think that is a problem what a problem kind like the same as the American side of things where there are there are two there will always be two very different groups of people that that that want to see change you'll have the people that and I feel like you've had in con Poland's had this group of people who are you know so patriotic and and and they've been in power for so long now what if now what if a different government comes into Power based on younger people more liberal side of it who who want to see a lot of stuff legalized like you know like the LGBT side of things which isn't legal in Poland um you know that could cause a rift in in the way things like it does in America you got so many different group so staunch different views like I mean we saw it ourselves in G we walked through literally an LGBT protest with people in skull masks and and and other people waving the flags and stuff and police anti protest yeah like it was yeah and that I think that's that's one of Poland's thing if you look at it from the outside cool but yeah it is divided in terms of it people Civil War coming are finding it increasingly difficult to coexist together and surveys show that both sides are highly suspicious of each other intolerant to opposing views and increasingly refusing to compromise and for years the current conservative government has been criticized by the liberal opposition for supposedly bending the rule I mean obviously things are changing now as well with all the voting I'm not actually too sure as of today of what's Happening um I'm not really following it that much but things are changing um so we'll see if it's forther better but who knows yeah RS in order to stay in power and it has had a growing beef with the European Union that's threatening to cut Poland off from EU funds as a punishment for not upholding the rule of law and the thing is that whatever side you cheer for the end result is bad for both and for Poland in general the country needs both parts of the population to coexist and work together and it needs the EU if it wants to be truly successful and if it doesn't manage to do that the Polish Miracle will be over soon before it has really started damn he's he to be fair I think he made some good points in there I think he talked about some good stuff um thanks to explained with dom um obviously for this video and um yeah it's it was really good actually understanding what the different where it's come from what it's done and where it could go like some there's definitely some good like theories of how it could go and what what it need what Poland needs to do to to get to a to get to a good point basically um yeah good video um informative thoughts what do you think gonna happen I just well what do you want to happen what I want to happen is for Poland to keep growing obviously I mean that's that's crazy by 20 was it 2030 or 2060 2030 it could be a bigger economy than the UK like that's mad but then again our government here is just [ __ ] yeah I feel like Poland might be going up UK might be going down so yeah yeah it's it's it's a it's good it's great it's interesting though maybe I can go back one time maybe one day not one time get him out guys um anyway but yeah guys let us know what you think let us know what you think is going to happen your your theories what you think of Poland and where you think it's going to go just yeah let let us know in the comments um and if you want to see more videos like this uh just let us know as well leave some recommendations and thank you again to explained with dom for the video very good we'll link that in the yeah we'll link that in the description make sure to give him a like and and a subscribe and yeah what are you lying for what do you mean but from us also and we'll see you in the next one peace peace|||foreign [Music] [Music] good morning everyone we are on a
mountain trail going around Morskie Oko Lake leading us to another mountain lake called
Czarny Staw. Czarny Staw is on the way to the highest peak
of Poland called Rysy. It supposed to take us not longer than two
hours to get to that Lake, from there we will see how the weather will be maybe we will
even go to the top of Rysy and yeah pretty excited to see it, because it's the first
time when I will be there it's hard to tell anything more, because it's not decided yet. We'll see what we'll do when we get there,
so see you later [Music] it took us around one hour to get the Chinese stuff from shelter
the trail was very pleasant easy and then it was slightly stiff but I think that everybody
can do that if you are at mosh keoko it's definitely worth to come here as both Lakes
are extremely beautiful and the views are just magical right now we're going over there
and we hope to see both Lakes from that point and to make some beautiful photos [Music]
so our goal for today was to get to the viewpoint on the way to Rysy. Rysy is the highest mountain peak in Poland
so it's a very popular trail and it's always busy there are many people so it's impossible
to be here alone it took us two hours to get here from the Schronisko Morskie Oko and the
trail wasn't very challenging physically but if you're scared of heights it might be slightly
difficult for you and scary, but believe me that the views are rewarding and it's totally
worth to come here. We spend a little bit of time here and now
we're going down back to the shelter to have our breakfast [Music] thank you hey we're almost there and it's
Czarny Staw let's go [Music] it's 12:30 we just got down the mountain and
it's time for breakfast we bought ourselves very delicious traditional Polish food all
the food here in the shelter it's below 10 euros but it's very delicious and despite
that there are many people here they're cooking very fast we stay at the second floor On this floor we have four rooms. This is ours, there's one more one more here
and one here. We've got two bathrooms on this floor and
a washroom very nice and clean and here we have a device for drying our shoes so it's
pretty cool. Let's get inside! Room 18 here we are so this room has place
for six people uh from what I see now we have the whole room packed this is the place where
we stay two beds for two of us we have a nice view from the window this is the entrance
to Mosquito shelter this place is very simple but it has everything we need we've got nice
clean and soft beds we've got hot showers we've got good food in the restaurant well
it's a perfect place for your Mountain Adventure after a short rest and a breakfast at 12 in
the shelter we spoke with our roommate and she advised us to check out another short
Trail leading from the shelter to the valley behind the monk the monk is a famous climbing
spot here locally and unfortunately we don't have enough time today or gear to climb up
the mountain but we will go ahead and check out the valley behind the Monk and as we left
the forest we can actually see the monk now yep so this is the Monk and that's how the
trail looks like we will hike up a bit for an hour get the valley and then decide if
we're going somewhere further or are we going back to the shelter weather is still pretty
fine but it's getting cloudy and might get a bit rainy in the evening so we'll see what
the day will bring what are you saying about that I like the
plan it doesn't seem very challenging but the view is like extremely beautiful so I'm
excited oh just came from here this is the shelter let's go today we also testing out
our new purchase the insta360 one X2 and tell us how is it is it better than the previous
footage what do you think [Music] a very common thing you would notice here
on trails in Poland is that people say hello to each other they say dobre or they say chest
which means High learn those two words and you can Mingle in between the trails [Music] people comparing to Mexico so we'll see what's
going to be at the top let's go [Music] we decided to finish today's hike here right
now we're on the trail leading from Morse to the valley of five polish Lakes from here
we can see both of the Lakes we can see more skoko and Charlie stuff the view is very beautiful
that's why we decided to stay here and spend a little bit more time enjoying the view I have to say that this is one of the most
Pleasant trailers I walked in Tetra mountains I think this Trail is for everyone it's not
very tiring but it's very rewarding now it started raining so I think it's time to go
to shelter [Music] hey guys we just got back to mosca Orca Lake today we walked over 20
kilometers we've seen a few beautiful viewpoints we've seen more scalca Lake and turning stuff
like from two different perspectives walking around morsica Alco was very pleasant we are
very satisfied with today and now we're going to have our dinner take shower and have a
good rest as tomorrow we're going to wake up very early see you tomorrow [Music] thank you for watching we hope you like this
video if you do leave some comments and hit the like button don't forget to subscribe
our Channel see you in the next one|||Hello my dear friends thank you very much 
for watching my channel again today we're   going to be talking about 10 things that 
shocked me in Poland so let's get into that. Shops are closed on Sundays. Don't think you can 
just go and buy something in the supermarket or   in a shop on Sundays because they are closed 
and this happens since 2018 when there was a   new law introduced which forbids shops to open 
on Sundays and it was shocking for me because in   Guatemala I think Sunday is the most important 
day of the week for shops because people don't   usually work on this day so they have time to 
go and buy, and in Poland there are only seven   Sundays during the year when the shops are open. 
You don't want to go during those seven Sundays   because believe me they are packed, they are 
full, they're so crowded, it's difficult to   find parking. Please let me know if in your 
country shops are open or closed on Sundays. Saturday is a day for cleaning. It 
is a tradition that families have,   that they deep clean the whole house, and it is 
from the youngest to the oldest, they all help   each other and they clean the whole house but 
it's a deep clean. In Guatemala there is not a   specific day for cleaning and I'm not saying that 
people in Poland don't clean on different days,   I'm just saying that there is a tradition that 
I'm sure that a lot of families keep that on   Saturdays they clean, and that's something 
that I have already got used to... on Saturday   mornings I usually deep clean the flat but 
at the beginning that was shocking for me People don't eat red meat on Fridays, and this 
is a tradition that is still kept nowadays,   I'm not saying that everyone does it, but 
according to the Catholic Church Fridays are   of penitence so you shouldn't eat red meat, and I 
noticed at least in Lubelskie and in Podkarpackie,   that a lot of people still follow this tradition 
and they don't eat red meat on Fridays,   instead they eat pierogi, or just spaghetti with 
sauce or pancakes, I don't know something else,   or fish and this was shocking for me because 
in Guatemala it doesn't happen. Guatemala is   a very Catholic country as well but this just 
happens during Lent not during the whole year   and in Poland, they also don't eat red meat 
on Christmas, and as I said I'm not saying   that it's everyone but I know that a lot of 
people don't eat meat Fridays, please let me   know down in the comments if in your country 
people do or do not eat red meat on Fridays The celebration of the name day. Yes, in Poland 
people celebrate their name day or 'Imieniny' in   Polish and this is a celebration of the day of the 
saint you're named after, but they don't celebrate   the Saints, they celebrate the name, and this is 
a celebration that is mostly popular among older   people but it is still very strong, and people 
gather with their families and friends and they   eat, and they drink. In some cases it is possible 
to celebrate it in different times of the year   because the name is so popular that many Saints 
had it that's why for example the name Maria,   I know that it is in different times of 
the year that is possible to celebrate it,   and some people even decide to celebrate it 
many times of the year because one time I   heard someone saying that Polish people like 
celebrating for everything and the name day   is a great day for you to celebrate, and 
drink, and eat with your family. Please   let me know if in your country people also 
celebrate the name they like they do in Poland The darkness during the winter. In Poland it gets 
dark quite early during the winter and especially   during December it gets dark around 3 P.M and 
that was completely shocking for me especially   because I'm from Guatemala, a country where 
it gets dark from 5 to 6 PM all year long and,   when I moved to Poland the winter was starting 
so it was one of the most difficult things for   me to get used to, and after three years it's 
a bit better but I'm not gonna lie to you that   when it's 3 P.M and it gets dark... in my mind I 
have that the day is over but it's not like that.   Please let me know in the comments at what time 
it gets dark in your country during the winter People take their shoes off when they visit 
someone. That is something strange for me because   in Guatemala I think I never removed my shoes when 
I entered someone's home, but in Poland every time   that you visit someone you're supposed to take 
your shoes off before you enter the person's home,   and that is because the shoes contain bacteria 
from the outside and in some occasions it is   raining outside, and there is snow, so you 
don't want to make a mess on the floor,   and people also have carpets and rugs, 
and you don't want to make them dirty,   so that's the reason why you should remove 
your shoes when you enter someone's home and,   my recommendation would be if you're 
visiting someone put on a good pair of socks. When you visit someone there is always a lot 
of food, one time even one person told me,   Jose my guests cannot leave my home if they 
are not full. And I think that is completely   true because when you visit someone, you're 
going to find salads, ham, cakes, sausages,   sandwiches, and many more things and, 
I think I don't know it's a it's a way   of Polish people making their guests feel 
welcome, because they offer a lot of food,   and the food is delicious, and the host 
always offers again, and over again,   and again, so believe me that when you visit 
someone you're going to leave this place full. In Poland studies are short. For you to 
get a master's degree you need five years,   of course the bachelor's degree is included in 
that, and students graduate from high school   when they're 19 years old so if you continue 
studying by the time you're 24 you're going to   have a master's degree. In Ukraine people graduate 
from high school when they're 17 years old,   and some of them decide to study in Poland so 
that means that by the time they're 22 they   have a master's degree. On the other hand, 
in Guatemala you need five years for you to   get the bachelor's degree and two extra if you 
want a master's degree and in some cases it's   even longer because of the bureaucracy at 
universities, which is awful. Please let me   know down in the comments how long it takes in 
your country for you to get a master's degree The villages are so beautiful, the first time that I 
was driving through a village I couldn't believe   what I was seeing, because in Guatemala sadly 
villages are places where the living conditions   are not good in some cases there is not 
even electricity, there is no asphalt on   the streets and yes, in general, they are poor 
places and the living conditions are not good,   and that's something that is very sad for me, 
but in Poland the villages are so beautiful and   sometimes people decide to move to the villages 
and they build a beautiful house with a beautiful   garden and a beautiful view. Please let me know in 
the comments how the villages are in your country You always hear that Polish people drink a lot 
but you don't really have an idea of how much   they drink until you go to a Polish wedding... 
you see bottle after bottle after bottle of vodka   coming to the table and then you think: well they 
mix it and they prepare drinks, let me tell you:   they don't. They drink it straight, clean, in 
shots of 30 or 50 milliliters and, afterwards,   they might drink some water, some juice, some 
soda, and they also have this beverage which is   called Bimber which is a homemade alcoholic 
beverage which contains between 50 and 70   percent of alcohol and, yes, you guessed 
well, they also drink it during weddings,   and they also drink the next day after the 
wedding...so a lot. It's just incredible for   me. Please let know down in the comments if 
people also drink in your country a lot. And,   my dear friends, thank you very much for 
watching, once again, please let me know   in the comments what things impress you or shock 
you or are interesting of this beautiful country,   and make sure you hit the like button and you 
subscribe and I'll see you on the next video.|||The railway station in Ustka Main promenade in Ustka - Marynarki Polskiej street Church. Holy Savior Port boulevard-Ustka Park them. John Paul II   Fishing port in Ustka Monument to the People of the Sea Ustka Lighthouse The eastern breakwater in Ustka View of the beach and the Baltic Sea in Ustka Ustecka Mermaid swing bridge in Ustka Marina Ustka The Seaside Promenade Beach in Ustka - the Baltic Sea|||hi everyone! welcome to my channel I'm Rafal 
and today I have some really exciting news   to share about the Polish Trans Euro Trail! 
so the community of local motorcycle riders   gathered around the Regional Adventure Trails 
initiative are working on two new tracks that   would complement current TET in Poland. this is 
being worked on under the supervision of Mirek   Antoniewicz, Polish TET Linesman so everything 
will be TET-legit the current egg-like shape of   TET in Poland will be joined by two new tracks 
making it possible to cross the country from   Southwest to Northeast or Southeast to Northwest 
or the other way around of course as you like it   so 900 and 700 new kilometers of off-road fun are 
coming up at the moment Riders are checking both   new tracks we need to make sure it is legal 
not transpassing through private properties   possible to ride through on an average adventure 
bike like t7 when finished those two new tracks   will be a great addition to the trans euro trail 
network and it might happen that both of those   tracks will be made public still before summer 
of 2023 so stay tuned what you are looking at   at the moment is the ride that we took yesterday 
along one of those new tracks now this is very   close to the city called Ełk in the Mazury Lake 
District and it was a beautiful ride absolutely   amazing time now fast gravel roads a bit of mud 
and all of that in the scenery that was bringing   a big smile to my face so I really hope you are 
as excited as I am for those new tracks and if you   are planning at TET trip to Poland I hope you will 
be able to take the ride across the new trails. so   more of content like this is coming up so 
please subscribe give it a thumbs up if   you liked it and if you would have 
any questions feel free to leave a   comment below thank you for watching 
and I'll see you next time cheers thank you foreign foreign|||Baby, it’s kind of crazy 
How else to phrase it? With you I've lost my senses Baby, what happened to ya?
I thought I knew ya But now it’s time to face it Ya hot and cold, high and you’re low messin' with my mind no oh oh that’s not how it goes so let me spell it out Now I’m better solo, solo I never let me down didi down down down  and now I’m gonna show ya show ya show you what it is you're missing out Now I’m better solo, solo  I never let me down down didi down down down Now I’m gonna show ya show ya How I be getting down (solo) Tell me Now was it worth it?
Playin’ me dirty but now who’s laughing baby? Watch me All eyes on me now Bet you regret how
What goes around comes around Ya hot and cold, high and you’re low messin' with my mind no oh oh that’s not how it goes so let me spell it out Now I’m better solo, solo I never let me down didi down down down  and now I’m gonna show ya show ya show you what it is you're missing out Now I’m better solo, solo  I never let me down down didi down down down Now I’m gonna show ya show ya How I be getting down (solo) No no, I’m going solo (yeah) ya better better watch me now cause I know how to let go gonna make it make it on my own Oh, oh no, I’m going solo (yeah) ya better better, watch me now cause I know how to let go so it’s clear to see I’m Now I’m better solo, solo I never let me down didi down down down  and now I’m gonna show ya show ya show you what it is you're missing out Now I’m better solo, solo  I never let me down down didi down down down Now I’m gonna show ya show ya How I be getting down (solo)|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Berlin bound We made it OMG I love it Can you see it? I need a black background my hair looks crazy we're headed to   our first Christmas market because we 
have some time before our train to Poland Yien: Dun dun! Gendarmenmarkt Christmas market, Berlin Yien: Oooh Dessa: Strong? Yien: Yeah, but it's good Mmmm! (Laughs) the train that we were on was late and  the train that we were supposed to catch was on time  (we are) 3 hours behind our intended schedule Dessa: Oooh, this is? Borscht? Yien: with dumplings It's damn good Dessa: We're in... how do you pronounce it again? Yien: vrot-swaaf (Wrocław) Dessa: we're going to? Yien: a market hall Yien: Damn good
Dessa: (laughs) It's huge Dessa: we are walking to.... Old Town? Yien: yeah, actually we just entered it
Dessa: oh this is Old Town? Oh we're in Old Town (laughs) Yien: Jarmark Bożonarodzeniowy
Dessa: you know how to pronounce? (laughs)  Yien: where are we now? Dessa: we are at a Christmas Market
Yien: where? Dessa: err.... in zuob.. zub... swaave NUTELLA this is a small (laughs) Dessa: mmm...
Yien: good? Dessa: it's fresh uh
Yien: is it hot? It's snowing! Whoaaa Damn good Dessa: This is top of my list, I would order this again Yien: I really like it too and the cup is so cute, it's like a little shoe Sausage and bread sausage and BREAD (laughs) Before I came here I was like 
what's so good about sausages but now I get it the sausages are really superior How would you rate it out of 10? I would rate the sausage... a 9 out of 10 It's really good (laughs) ♪ Here comes Santa Claus ♪ It is day three, we are going to get some 
pretzels for breakfast and then we have to catch our train  we are currently in Wrocław and we are going to go to Krakow after this Her: You're making a vlog Dessa: Yes! You wanna say hi? Her: yeah. HI! (laughs) MMMM Yien: which one do you prefer? You prefer this one? (laughs) We got to catch our train so we're gonna finish this on the train Hello hello here is bedroom
oh my god we have a whole kitchen to ourselves Good? This (kotlet) is damn good Download Moo Moo! (iykyk) Woooooo Right now we're at the Jewish quarter so all the Polish Jews used to live here Wa wa wee wa! I catch you!
(laughs) AHHHH oh this shit is good though Thank you! Nice warm soup Dessa: Is that pasta?
Yien: yeah! Oh nice! mmm MMMM I think this might be my favourite so fa... so far This is really good hot chocolate, it's damn thick Do you want the white borsch 
or the Silesian sour soup This tastes like tom yum, wanna try? Anyway this (noodles) is 60 cents, this is 50 cents 
and this is six dollars, Singapore dollars   It's all clumping up, why is it all clumping up? I can't even make instant soup baby It looks disgusting Today, we are going to the national park Ojców National Park This is mine
oh SHIT Such a BIG bite I'll get this again before I leave Can you see how foggy it is?!? So pretty We're in the town but it doesn't seem like any food options are open luckily we had the Mcdonald's So we've been walking for the past hour
to the nearest town called Skała but we don't know yet if there's a bus going back to Krakow Fidessa's obviously enjoying the walk (laughs) bloody hell... Yien promised me that we were supposed 
to have some special fish Yien: I mean I think the fish, they close in winter
Dessa: the fish close in the winter? I mean there are no fishes to be caught in winter Vegan futomaki, it's my first time trying vegan food There's portobello mushroom so goooood (our) first rice in four days damn good! This is what we have You're taking literally all the bacon, I don't have any bacon. What the heck no, I don't want Really damn good, the stewed meat is so flavourful Dessa: oh my goooood, ew you can't wear this tomorrow Yien: I can (laughs) Dessa: WHAT? Help me This is the freaking queue Flame grilled, literally Oh my god, it looks so good It's so juicy, their sausages are really the best Let's welcome Fidessa Ng to the table Yien: see, I have a bowl but you don't have a bowl Dessa: (sighs) so romantic... 
he treats me the way he treats himself I got the Kinder Bueno one,
and she got the strawberry flavoured one Yien: why did you get the strawberry one?
Dessa: I don't know, why not? I can't remember if there was plain custard... MMMM DAMN GOOD Dessa: Is it better than Krispy Kreme?
Yien: yeah oh yeah that's right, macro bro I rate this a 9 and a half out of 10, serious Good morning, it is day 5 we're going to some museums today and oooh, look at my makeup today Car museums, go see a war museum! I haven't packed Dessa: It's day... 5? 6?
Yien: 6! We're at the Old Town Market, it was closed yesterday Yien: are you okay?
Dessa: yeah, I'm cold so I'm staying in the sun Dessa: (this is) for the bun?
Him: yes yes Oh my gosh, this is so cute!! Pasta in a cup We're at the Old Town Fidessa made a new friend
helping her take pictures ♪ new friends, friends friends friends ♪ Ahhhh, don't fly, stay down! Hey, bread boy! Bread boy is back! Bread boy! (x2) Bread boy HA 5 dollars, 5 Singapore dollars Tastes like cotton candy We're going to Zakopane (Poland) Just arrived in Zakopane and this is our room It is... freezing Look at the fluffy snow! so apparently this means 'long live sex and drinking' Oh, that's the health one  Dessa: is it good?
Yien: omg damn good Wa this is really top shit eh usually I don't like sweet and savoury but this is so good the jam is just a little bit sweet so it helps balance out the saltiness of the cheese MM so good look how beautiful it is cold! Yien: oh my god 
Dessa: hi baby whoaaaa (laughs) damn good (the only things he says about food lol) Wow that is RICH Happy day 8! Look at this poor little knee (It's) day 8 and i'm hiking by myself because Fidessa is down with a sprained knee so look at this view Dessa: The best tea I've had in life
Yien: huh really? Dessa: yeah!
Yien: yeah, it's very good Yien: Good afternoon!
Dessa: we made a friend oh my god he looks great|||Welcome from Wrocław. I visitied Wrocław University of Technology, to take part in AKL STOL conference. I gave a speech on Etrich Taube pioneer airplane, you will see this speech in a moment. Most presentations were for people highly educated in aviation and studying it. There were also aviation corporations presenting their career opportunities. If you failed to graduate in technical university, try YouTube like I did. I admire students' inventions. This is the Aurora rocket, element of "PWr in Space" project. There were RC planes designed by AKL club, which compete in SAE Aero Design competition in the US. The "regular" category plane has to carry as heavy a payload in single bay as possible. One plane can compete only once. Even a successful plane has to be replaced by a new one the following year. The "adcanced" category calls for a plane tackling "special" mission. This craft is called "PADA". The large one carries PADA and water. Large plane (remote controlled) had to fly over a target, detect it and release PADA, which had to recognize the target and land on it. Than PADA was turned into a rover and carried water on the ground. Only Polish team had no problems releasing the PADA from the mother-plane. The target reach rate was 65%, and they were the only to succeed. Wrocław team has a stunning collection of trophies and is feared by the competitors each time. Mike Patey (Draco creator) signed students' plane. Polish students have little time to create their designs. Planes have to be shipped in February to reach USA by early summer. Local teams have few months more - this is significant. The shipping cost of planes alone is over $10 000, an enormous cost. I could see Wrocław from above for free. Students travel between university buildings in Polinka cable car. As a student I drove Toyota Celica GT-Four, and thought it was something... I thank all the channel supporters and patrons. Conference organizers recorded my speech, to show it to you. I have one more question (at the end). Watch my speech - Zabytki Nieba live! We have heard much about what is to come in aviation, let me now tell about what took place long ago. After the death of Otto Lilienthal Etrich family bought two of his gliders to develop them. Igo Etrich (1879-1956) lived in the era of progress. In 1879 a mild-steel oceanic ship was a novelty, in 1956 Lockheed Starfighter exceeded Mach 2. Etrich studied also biology. Javan Zanonia seed proved crucial. It looks like a palm tree, but is also described as kind of cucumber (?). The seed uses phugoidal oscillation to glide on great distances. Seed is heavy with lightweight wings. Maple seeds cover 5km, Zanonia flies much further, sometimes reaching ships far from coast. Etrich and Wels created a glider based on Zanonia seed. Later they tried 1908 Antoinette V8 motor, but this modification was a failure. Later Etrich continued developing seed-shaped wings, Wels went toward biplanes and craft with moving wings. Etrich added tailplane and created successful plane,  the Etrich Taube first flown in 1910 which resembled pigeon in flight. In 1910 plane was patented. License for production was sold to Rumpler company. But in 1910 something happened and patent protection was lifted. Probably the plane was claimed so good that (along with flag or anthem) it is a nationwide good, and should be widely available. By 1913 virtually any manufacturer would build some Taubes. About 50 (=90%) of German and Austrian airplane companies built Taube. They built great number of 500 planes. Records made Taube famous. These are record and pioneer flights. Taube carried first passenger over the English Channel. There was over 700km flight completed in one day. There was Berlin-Copenhagen direct oversea flight. Altitude records are described as between 6093 and 7200m. This postcard show Taube over Johanisthal airfield, with mountain range painted below. Taube flew over nearby Śnieżka mountain (1603m). Taube had traditional all-wooden fuselage with steel cable reinforcements. Covered in canvas with several metal parts around the engine and sometimes along the floor or top part of cockpit. Two-seat version quickly became a standard. Pilot was in the back, and controls were relatively modern, with yoke and rudder pedals. Front seat doubled as main fuel tank. Apart from license-built wooden version there was also Stahltaube with metal frame, built at least by Jeannin and DFW works. Closed cockpit version was proposed, either to protect the crew from elements while writing a report or as pioneer "air taxi". Here is the tailplane. Darker part was rigid, transparent part was made of bamboo and warped to act as elevator. Only the rudder was hinged. Two flag-shaped parts. This Taube in in Polish Aviation Museum in Kraków. It was built as an oldtimer in 1930's hence the post WWI paint scheme. Landing gear was Bleriot's patent with trailing swingarms. Rubber cables for shock-absorbing were tied to leading edge. Notice the hook acting as parking brake for engine trial. Some Taubes had wheels below wingtips and in the back instead of standard tailskid. There is also an era-specific skid in front to protect from damaging the propeller. Army required plane to take off from a field ploughtd single time. Stahltaubes had more modern gear. In case of landing gear damage it did not punch the radiator. Most Taubes had two radiators - one per side above the landing gear. ...floatplane... Wings clearle resemble the Zanonia seed. Distinctive shape. Airfoil was very thin, and not closed from the underside. This is the "Bridge". Wing had 2 standard spars, with third spar underneath. It was possible to make this into a folding wing, I read a description of it, but have never seen historic photo of folded wings. Bamboo wing segment used for warping. Many cables ran along the bridge and over the wing each wing was warped by about 10 cables. Taube was easy to fly, but required physical strength. There was a chain, cables, angles, pulleys - hard to move. This show the warping movement upward range. Some companies aliminated the bridge, fitted modern-style tailplane and hinged ailerons instead of warped wings. French dubbed the Taube "invisible" as trailing parts were covered on top side only, so when this 14m plane reached 400m it was hard to see and hear. In 1913 several crashed were caused by wings braking off. "Klapptaube" was a new nickname. Durability tests were performed. 3,42g made wooden Rumpler Taube disintegrate. For some reason Gotha Taubes were more durable, and only Stahltaubes withstood the test. Now new taubes were ordered by the army before the WWI. Only the ones already bought were in use. Engines: 4600-11000cc, 50-120HP, inline 4 or inline 6. One picture shows Taube with 7cylinder radial rotary engine, I guess it was the Gnome Omega 7. Taube had pressurized cooling system, with no coolant evaporation or loss. 16 litres of coolant for 6 cylinder version. THere was a gap between radiator and fuselage. In winter felt was squeezed there to limit cooling potential. Some ngines came fith radiator fitted in safe place above cylinder heads. Notice the small tank above the cockpit. Some planes have larger one, some have small spherical one or no tank at all. Take a look at this Albatros. Fuel pumps were not used back then. But tank was below the engine, so it needed pressurizing. Pneumatic pump behing engine generated pressure inside fuel tank pushing fuel to the engine. But to start the engine a small tank was used to make fuel go down to the engine upon cranking. This was what it is for, still some Taubes are pictured without this tank. In 1911 Italy was at war with Ottoman Empire, which had vast part of Northern African territory. THere was a batlle near Trypolis (today Libia). Italian pilot raided the Turks with Taube. Two 1,5kg grenades hit the target, two missed. Ottoman Empire claimed that Hague Convention was violated. It prohibited dropping explosives from balloons, airships and other inventions of similar nature. Is plane of the similar nature to the airship? This is Taube and Zeppelin. Turks were shot upon with 150 shells from warship few hours before, and had no problem with that. By 1914 Taube was obsolete. Still during the Battle of Tannenberg Taube observer helped by reporting unexpeted changes in Russian positions. Taubes dropped explosives and calls to surrender over Paris. But Chinese story stands out. There was a German colony Tsingtau, besieged by the Japanese. Gunther Plushow made one airworthy Taube out of two damaged ones with Chinese Oak airscrew which had to be reglued after each flight. He flew as reckon, delivered orgers, and escaped the siege in Taube, later crashed, and went through Japan, Hawaii, USA, Gibraltar and England to Germany. He was treated as spy, as such escape was considered impossible. Taube was "armed" only with handheld firearms. It was slow and not agile, many airmen shared such fate as shown, shot down by more modern planes. Taubes were withdrawn to training, and Ernst Udet, Max Immelmann and other future aces made their first flights in Taubes. There was a factory in Liebau, Austria (today: Lubawka, Poland). It is south-west from Wrocław, on Polish-Czech border. Etrich build factory there. Some buidlings may still exist. It was close to stadium and railroad. These fields were the runway. Few hindred meters from Polish-Czech border. Does this Taube fly over this modern landscape? Very likely. Etrich also built there: the Ertich VII monoplane, 4-seat Luftlimousine, and 1929 Sport Taube. It was faster than any Czechoslovakian fighter, so it was impounded due to risk of isung it for smuggling. This made Etrich withdraw and go back to making textile industry machines. Factory was no longer functional (as Etrich),  but in 1948-51 70 "Lub-1 ABC" gliders were built there. Then facility turned to a lumber mill. Taube was iconic. German book of the era divides planes into: Doppledecker (biplanees), Eindecker (monoplanes) and Tauben - the latter is not a type, but airframe configuration standard. I wish all students to make something that will be shown on stamps, coins, commercials, may all licensing laws be abided. If your today's invention be as memorable as Taube, it will be covered during 2137 AKL Conference. Thank you. - Thank you, please remain for a moment, Kacper Adolf, chairman of our club will hand a gift. I was given a model of "advanced" plane. Made by designers of the original in the same workshop. Very valuable piece for my collection. Thaks to Wrocław University of Technology new films are to come. It will take more than one visit there to cover the topic and meet people involved, I do my best to create as good a content I can. One more question. I am searching for 1918-1939 Polish touring planes. RWD-4, RWD-5, RWD-9, RWD-13. but also twin-engined like RWD-11. Or planes of Polish airlines: older Junkers, Lockheed Electra, PZL Wicher? Models have to be large, over 1m span, so rather RC models. No need for extra detailing. If you have such model, write me, there is a chance to show it to many people interested (but not on my channel). Come visit Polish Aviation Museum in Kraków and meet me, and see you in future episodes. Bye!|||Hello! My name is Vlad. I'm director of "Residence 
Angels" company. We are helping foreigners,   who are coming to Poland to develop 
their lives and careers. We are helping   with temporary residence cards, Permanent and 
Long-Term Residence of EU, and citizenship of   course. If you need help, we are welcoming you 
to our office for free consultation. See you!|||ches V and in English welcome to the channel 
my name's Rob what's up uh in today's video   we are going to look at chinasa postu and 
that is 13th Outpost and this is a comedy   sketch uh part of a show where it's a bit 
of satire that talks about real life and   learning about history as well um so let's 
see what they have for us today in race ists if someone has to say no I'm not 
racist uh they normally have racist tendencies for Fore spee for speee what is going on here why are guns involved hang on excellent subtitles uh my 
ancestors was zisha the black legendary polish   Knight who fought against the Tuton tonic order 
um so I'm pretty sure that basically Z zavisa   the black was actually black if I remember 
rightly if i' I've done a tiny little bit of   research I think this certainly plays up 
to the stereotypes people have of Poland   and some stereotypes are true maybe there's 
less tolerance of of other races you know   um I think that's a key issue that's coming 
out here and it is satire at the end of the day for and that's straight away going back 
to the whole thing of it does seem look I   know like polls suffered from the Germans but 
everything always seems to go back to either   the Germans or the Russians even if like in 
this example there nothing to do with the   Germans and nothing to do with the Russians 
but to be fair polls do like to have a go at   the Germans and Russians for for for rightful 
reasons obviously but it's not always their fault what do you think you're doing you 
black magic fatherfucker didn't even use word don't bring us British in it we haven't done 
anything this time now blaming us for the Titanic   honestly uh it's this spot on though isn't it it's 
spot on like it's not about offending anyone it   that's a SAT that's satire for you but it's you 
know it's talking about you know the intolerances   that that some polls have um it's talking 
about how how you know the Germans the Russians   the Brits get blamed for things even if it's 
nothing to do with them it's got some truth in it we're even having a shot at women now 
honestly women are in like I I don't look   I know I know there was a female King many many 
years ago but I I think within the whip side of   women you can see when women feel like they've 
been oppressed and and and pushed down and now   women are getting the power that's why you 
see like for example in the summer all the   women with without any bras on because it 
starts as a statement it then became just   the norm um you know in V all the young girls 
young women should I say um without bras on   and things because it's another thing it's not 
just a stereotype that women have been oppressed   they they have and now they are fighting 
and and and breaking away and and becoming equals oh fore fore foree for she is a very hot woman that was fantastic like I said it's it's a 
that is a really really good Sati and and they've   done plenty of these obviously the the first one 
I watched was was about Hitler I love the the guy   that is um very extrovert very Camp very likes 
to flow and move um but this is this is clearly   picking up on things that are true to life that's 
what satire is it doesn't matter um it does when   it comes to satire it doesn't matter who it's 
like political satti it doesn't matter who's in   charge you find comedy from the the realities and 
I and I you know I think there is a lot of Truth   in this like I said about women being oppressed 
and and you know the whole thing of I don't know   if I you know in the time that I've been to Poland 
what the five visits I've been on I don't recall   any black people well that's not necessarily a 
problem maybe black people don't want to come   to Poland I don't know um but I think Poland's 
not seen as a multi-racial country and I think   that's probably true um there's there's a lot of 
things in here that they get spot on they get spot   on and sometimes things are stereotypes sometimes 
there is some truth in them and I think they did   this really well and I think they do the the this 
really really well where they make a joke of it   because sometimes when things aren't great it's 
good to joke about them and make light of them   because it then it softens it a little little 
bit it's it's it doesn't make things as bad as   they no that's not right I don't mean they don't 
make it as bad as they are um in terms of what   you know the actual issues are but it it makes 
it less of an issue I think less yeah less of an   issue it on the on the progression side of things 
so I've I thought that was absolutely fantastic a   really really good episode thank you so much for 
watching if you want to support the channel then   you can become a member um you can buy some 
merchandise down below and buy me a coffee   and that helps me continue to do these things if 
you want to check out our Vlogs where we've been   to Poland Australia uh Italy Portugal etc etc go 
to Charlie and Rob and I will catch you next time Papa|||this Rollercoaster rides into the dragon's mouth from 20 m, seriously RMF Dragon is an attraction with a speed of 75 km/h generating 3.5g G-forces, an amazing attraction for a good start, I tell you, see the whole movie click here|||I'm here in Warsaw, Poland, 
where the local Red Cross branch is giving out care packages to people
who are living with family and friends in Warsaw, host families or at 
government reception centers. People are lining up here in the 
snow to get these packages. They contain everything
like hot meals and rice, kitchens supplies, hygiene products. And people can request things
like pillows, strollers, or really any other items they need to feel like
they're able to have a sense of normalcy for them and their families
as they await their next steps.|||US Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin said Friday
that the U.S. will sell 250 M1A2 Abrams tanks to Poland, giving a key NATO ally that borders
Russia a significant boost in firepower. Austin was in Warsaw for talks with Polish
officials about Russia’s military buildup around Ukraine. He noted that adding the tanks to the Polish
arsenal will ensure more equitable security burden-sharing in NATO. As of now, no delivery timeline has been set. SEPv3 is the latest and most potent variant
of the M1A2 Abrams Main Battle Tank. In this video Defense Updates analyzes how
the U.S plans to strengthen NATO's eastern flank with sales of M1A2 Abrams SEPv3 tanks
to Poland? Let's get into the details. Viewers may note that Russian actions have
made the US and NATO extremely apprehensive. In January last year, the Polish military
conducted a massive simulated wargame against Russia's Western Military District named Winter-20. While the intricate details are classified,
the outcome was demoralizing for Poland. As per reports, Poland was not able to defend
against the Russian assault for more than 5 days. Earlier several prominent members of Congress
are asking the US Defense Department to fast-track the sale and delivery. Citing the Russian build-up near Ukraine,
Representatives Mike Rogers (R-AL), ranking member of the House Armed Services Committee;
Mike Turner (R-OH), ranking member of the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence;
and Lisa McClain (R-MI), a member of the House Committee on Armed Services, had urged Secretary
of Defense Lloyd Austin to accelerate the transfer. Abram was first introduced in 1980 to replace
the M60 main battle tank which was introduced in 1960. It was significantly more potent than the
M60 and featured many top-of-the-line components like a fire control system that allowed up
to 90% accuracy at ranges of 2,000 meters. The tank was technologically well ahead of
most other tanks of its era. The U.S military has kept on upgrading the
tank to maintain its edge. For example, in 1986, the tank received a
more powerful 120 mm German-engineered main gun and in 1988 it got a layer of depleted
uranium armor to increase protection. These upgrades were provided to Abrams so
that it could dominate the Soviet tanks and repeal any armored thrust. This helped Abrams tanks roll over enemy tanks
in Afghanistan and Iraq. Abrams was designed so that it could accommodate
new enhancements. This kind of forward-thinking has enabled
it to absorb new technologies. The M1A2 Abrams SEPv3 has added several features. Here is a brief overview: 1. It now includes an Ammunition DataLink. With this, the tank crew can set a distance
at which a shell will explode. So, if a building is targeted then the shell
will explode inside the building instead of exploding after it has flown through it. This will enhance the precision of the hit
- destruction will be inflicted at the correct place and limit unintended damage. 2. M1A2 SEPv3 has added a better-infrared sight. Infrared sights basically enhance the night
fighting ability and with this improvement, the new variant will be better equipped for
twilight missions. 3. The remotely-operated .50 caliber machine
gun will now be positioned at a comparatively lower height enabling better targeting position. 4. M1A2 SEPv3 has an auxiliary power unit (APU). This will allow the tank to keep running communications
and sensors and maintain battlefield awareness without having to use its powerful 1,500 horsepower
gas turbine engine. The engine is known to uses a lot of fuel
and is also a target for infrared homing weapons. 5. It also adds passive armor which will improve
the tank's ability to survive when hit with the latest anti-tank weapons. 6. New explosive reactive armor (ERA) packages,
known as the Abrams Reactive Armor Tile (ARAT) is deployed. ERA basically works by placing “tiles”
that have explosives. When an incoming projectile hits them, they
explode outward & explosive power of the projectile is deflected. These tiles are fitted on specific portions
of a tank. 7. The most important upgrade will certainly
be the addition of the Trophy Active Protection System (APS). Israeli-made Trophy will be fitted on the
side of M1A2 SEPv3. Active or 'hard kill’ protection systems
consist of sensors that are capable of detecting and tracking incoming anti-tank projectiles. After that, the targeted tank launches an
interceptor projectile to shoot the incoming round. This is different from the 'soft kill’ approach
which involves jamming the projectile’s guidance or confusing them. In 2017, Colonel Glenn Dean a project manager
at the Army’s Redstone Arsenal had told Military.com that he “tried to kill the
Abrams tank 48 times and failed.” Russia operates as many as 12,000 tanks but
a good percentage of them are older tanks and many of the newer T-90s have not been
updated to the latest standards. In certain scenarios, numerically inferior
but more capable tanks with longer range & better sensors can defeat or halt the progress of
a much larger enemy tank force. This is especially true when these are deployed
in defensive formations. Poland’s defense minister Mariusz Błaszczak
had earlier stated regarding the M1A2 Abrams SEPv3 deal, “So we are ordering the most
modern tanks. Tanks available in the best-equipped version,
tanks that are combat-proven, tanks which were constructed to counter the most modern
Russian T-14 Armata tanks” T-14 Armata tanks are currently available
in very low numbers though the availability could increase in the coming days. It is evident that 250 M1A2 Abrams tanks will
be a major force enhancer for Poland.|||The world is rapidly changing and we at SOFTSWISS  and we at SOFTSWISS are embracing these changes. When opening a new company office we are designing the perfect place for our employees to unlock their potential What’s a good location for us? A great place to both work  and live SOFTSWISS in Poznan is a place for productivity and exchange of ideas. It's an opportunity to become stronger, and shape your environment. It's a choice to work alone, with like-minded people or with the whole world at once In our new reality, the company is where YOU are. An office is more than a space in a modern business center  it’s also a cool home office an office in a buzzing city, an office in a quiet cafe, on a terrace, outside or even on the go. It’s an opportunity to be yourself and share with those around you An opportunity to come together be part of a close-knit team, or be proactive and implement your own ideas, to work with passion, however with whomever you like, and whenever you find it convenient. The sky is the limit! Be inspired and make the iGaming world better. SOFTSWISS AND POZNAN
 A WINNING COMBINATION FOR YOU|||Hello! Saturday morning is the best part of the weekend, isn't it? So let's grab a cup of coffee and start the day! As I had to sort some things out this morning, I took my car and made quick trip to the mall. Unfortunately it was very cloudy and windy today.  At least parking has beautiful, yellow, sunny color!  This mall building is really stunning. Look at this roof! I can not skip bookshop... Am I the only one, who admires bookshops and writing stuff? :) Obviously I had to try on some clothes. I'm wondering, when I get a pair of flare jeans? These were quite nice... I decided to buy 2 macaroons. As it turned out, they only looked so good. :( I expected something much better... I took pistachio and vanilla flavor. It's time to unpack my food shopping. It lasts for the whole work week, I guess.  Today I bought the nice headband and 2 new plates. I'm obsessed with buying "kitchen" stuff :) Let's tidy up. Clean kitchen makes cooking even more pleasant! It's tea time. Are you more coffee or tea person? After the busy morning and quite intensive afternoon, let's prepare a dinner. To make it easier and quicker, I decided to prepare pasta with tomato sauce. Add oregano, salt and pepper to make the flavor multi-faceted. Grana Padano cheese and basil on the top! Let's finished my german classes homework and relax! Thanks for watching! Hope you like it :) Regards!|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Listen, we're supposed to be close because we came to Venice Beach here to be close to the airport, at 7 p.m. we have to return the car, but now it shows us that it's half an hour because the traffic jams have changed, it was supposed to be 15 minutes. Let's go, last meal, last meal and we'll report back . how does it taste and what does the in and out burger look like Damn, time has flown quickly Oh, there will be one more in the end there will be one more Homeless people in the video oh look, we found it, we finally found the districts There are some tents Hello Listen, today I will show you here the in and out burger founded in 1948 in the United States, we are in a great place because planes fly over this place and let's see what good things they have here, what kind of burger you can eat here, there is a very long queue for the Drive In, that stretches all the way down the street, but look what the menu is, they have basically four types, three types of burgers and fries plus drinks and three sets also a very simple menu s any gadgets what can be found in these burgers because I already know that the change will be stopped Polish theme thick thick Polish theme we have good for this We ordered we got a number I got two cups because they are available for sets, you can, I've already seen that lemonade is good, I think he once had such a menu, oh well, I'll add lemon to that for cola. McDonald's also had such a simple menu before he started making a million different kinds of crap. Okay, I've got a lemon here . there is still a place where you can get ketchup and peppers, but the peppers are not good, I praised the peppers, but you have to come soon, peppers, because the peppers are super spicy, but delicious planes are flying . 33 I guess too many of these chilies were lost, because I got so many in the box, the one we had yesterday, we could have had them. put on There is also one here, now the queue has decreased, but there is a whole street there, there was a queue there, a guy takes orders here, it's a very simple menu, here, the mill, where we were yesterday, it was the same, non-stop grinding, Okay, ours, this one, our order, such sets Janek, come on jio Okay, let's sit Look here at this one Look at this piece of onion I ch and midor and midor this But here's your tomato, here's your double tomato, instead of the onion I ordered it and I have a double onion We also have it but jaid but I won't give you mine all the time here are the orders, I beat my burger, I wanted to show you the peppers, which are very nice, spicy , I can recommend these burgers, they are definitely better than McDonald's, great. This is also the place. Planes are flying all the time, kids were fighting here for the chair, who should sit where, for the next one. See the plane. now there's one flying at us, there's one taking off Well, here it's normally non-stop take-off and landing, this one's flying a little low, look Janio, oh mother, come on Janek, let's run away, we'll return the car, I made it, it's cool, this application uploads photos here, my friend Emanuel has an add-on, he has two other cars, there's everything. ok here they are foldable The seats are also positive I hope there will be nothing more there later I will tell you about the prices nothing happened so it's finished we have all the suitcases now we have to rent a stroller for 8 dollars That's it and we're moving on what our stroller looks like on the way back, not a lot of pain for one stroller, big airport, big musts OB We're going to leave our luggage somewhere, it's somewhere in Warsaw, it's 10550 Okay, and here are the gates A53 A60 A53 A60 here we have C so we're going that way, this rental has ended, I'll tell you that this is a great deal I highly recommend this application no one pays me for it but they are great I don't know half the price I guess rental cars you can rent a car here for 40-50 dollars a day everything you put in the application photos make an appointment with the owner he is here he came to pick us up, now he left us because we were writing to each other in the chat, we also leave photos and everything is a problem. There's nothing to be afraid of, okay, and we're looking for ours here, there's bi in the end, it'll probably be there And there was such a big queue at the back, but luckily it wasn't for us, some Filipino airlines to the Philippines, so many people come here, they fly to the States, and we are looking for ours, there is A1, there will be a flight, I don't think there is a queue for the backdrop, we'll see what it will look like in the United States. Listen. 23 perfectly balanced by weight Ideal 230 our luggage is 230 d max loaded But look how nice we have this one, let's get rid of this luggage, only the seats will be loose, good we had stretch and raider tape with us, it's ready, there's a little more here, it's the wrong one, but he chose it for roof Oh mother, what happened, dad left the coffee on the roof Listen, we left, we knew at 10 p.m. The children fell asleep right after take-off, yes, and it's 1937. No, wait, we got up TR hours ago because it was 7:00 on the plane in the morning, we got off the plane and suddenly it's 7:00 p.m. instead of instead of 10:00 and 3 hours Now we're still on our way to Wrocław Well, I wonder if we'll go to sleep, well, that's cool, because we met some viewers on the plane Best regards, where will I leave it? Okay, let's go because we're in my home, hold on until soon, I'm sure Marianka and Welcome, they've teleported . here to me, to the barn, to my shop, the end of the good, the end, the end of the trip, the end of November and the end of the United States, yes, we came back in May, because if anyone hasn't seen it, the trip lasted almost 27 days, April, May at the turn, well, it's a revelation, it's nice to watch, it's nice to remember, but the last one the episode now, just a summary, one day we will finally be able to record it Well, maybe now, because we are flying out, we are flying out tomorrow, maybe we will record the podcast there, we will be able to do it, you know, maybe we will rest. Take a piece of paper, just in case, I have already taken a piece of paper with the expenses, but anyway, if you have it, Do you have any questions if you're watching and I don't know, are you planning a trip to the United States and you have, because now I, for example, if we're planning this trip, where are we going now, I also found videos, I found a YouTuber, I asked him, he replied to me and somehow it's like this, we already know something. We already know something. yes, because it's usually like that, when you come back, you're smarter no, so it's worth getting there in advance, especially since we also like to get a little more information so that we know exactly what to expect and we'll get something out of it, so it's nice to have this information they are there somewhere not to make any mistakes that can be avoided earlier Well, what's already in the episode, it's already Mainly there, yes, it was the burgers I liked the thick slice of onion, very important Well, there was onion, it's almost like home, because earlier, actually we haven't eaten any burgers, no, it's been a month, no. We went to McDonald's once, but we went to McDonald's to check the difference between Polish and American, and well, McDonald's is not good anywhere, it's just like that, you know, McDonald's is McDonald's, and we didn't find it here. really, these burgers were very, very nice, and then, what later, we just didn't have the strength, so you know, we have to film everything already, because what does the flight look like, this is the first episode, so to Stan Here, I use a camera, especially since there actually, we slept mostly on the flight, but he was there for the night and in this direction we slept, I was the best one, funny because I was sleeping, the kids were sleeping on the seats upstairs, and I miraculously squeezed in here, into the gap between the seats, and I was sleeping on the ground on the floor, and then I couldn't get out you stayed there, could you make a report from the floor, friend Grzesiu, I see that it's behind the grove there, hello, hello, it's creeping in, we're recording here, we're recording a summary of the distance, so this flight is fast, fast, bad, and the return flight, that's not the case at all, because it's at night we didn't even give here because there were a million meals as usual on the plane, we probably couldn't eat them all because the children were sleeping and we were sleeping And here And everyone gets Whether child or not child, they get a full portion and they just woke us up and here you are again Oh my God this there are already pull-out tables to fill with this food, so here's a piece of advice if you've just watched that one, don't take any of your food on the plane, because if you're on a flight, not if you're on a flight, well, I don't know, but now I was looking at 2,800 under 3,000, so don't worry. you can go both ways like this organize a flight to some different place now the flight has a lot of these many different destinations I looked in the United States We will probably slowly plan because I already see Yesterday was Wednesday again I didn't look and it's cheap Wednesday we check the tickets and it's already one Wednesday in a row maybe when we go away we'll see on for sure, but we were definitely captivated by the states and we will definitely go back there. Not every year, yet, a series from the states. No, now I've recorded as much as I have. We won't be recording that much anymore, and we won't be going back for that long. Well, not this one, but it was nice. to get back home, we managed to get there somehow Well, we already miss home because we know, cool, cool, cool, and not everything. That's it. We're packing today, so I don't know yet, we'll see Grzegorz while waiting, we'll record him sitting in his shelter somewhere. please leave it for the brushes, and in the meantime, if I do n't finish anything, we'll say goodbye. Thanks, and if not, there will be 10 greetings, there will be 10 greetings, but at this point, please, if you've been here once or maybe you liked something there, you want to stay longer, leave it. leave a subscription , write a comment, maybe if you have any questions, I will be happy to reply. Bye, take care. Hey, okay, I'm back for a moment. I would like to remind you that there are prizes waiting for you for subscriptions. First , there will be a small motorbike for PLN 30,000, then Comos, there is a plan for PLN 500,000. Enjoy. I'll light it up because we were supposed to start the Road King Zaz, we'll see about the pump-and-pump transfer. I don't know if there's fuel, but there's no fuel. We'll see about the battery , I think it's kaput, but there's no fuel here. At least something smells, something smells, well, we'll have to replace some kind of battery , I think my battery is a bit weak. you, but it was set to 6 vol again, Grzesiu, look, you won't believe me, how is it supposed to charge, look, okay, I switched it to 6 vol. But why did he think it was on, well, it can be charged at 6 vol. That's right. no, I changed it there once, because here's some Oh look, what a piece of paper it's connected to Well, wait for 12am, damn Grzegorz, you'll have O, he hasn't touched it here yet Oh, you see, and now it's charging, and now you can check with a meter whether there is a higher voltage, not with these are the kind of must, I have to buy a better one because this one is one Have you seen it here What are the noises no Good it's when we made it The patent has been like this for years or it's better because patents are the best Well okay but no Someone was joking recently or at 6 V We are charging, I said that at 36 in fact at s 24 it was at 12 Yesterday not when Plug in the Almy yesterday And I actually lifted it up and looked at s Okay, this is it, because I already thought that the battery might actually Well, it's Mariusz. he was buying He supposedly said, okay, detectors, maybe I'll take the detector to the beach, but I have a lasso. I was about to do a lasso, some kind of competition, something, I don't know, maybe someone wants to buy an original lasso from the United States, what if we had a show, a show, or a competition in Łeba, but there's so much going on in Łeba? that it's hard to take it somewhere next year, I had a video on how to throw such a lasso, God, I'm tired. Today, I've been kind of nervous since the morning, I think I've been packing for this trip, it turned out that I only read the e-mail because I bought a parking lot at the airport and It occurred to me that I had to provide the registration number 24 hours beforehand, and I didn't read the message, so I didn't give it, so I quickly sent what number, what, something, some kind of nervousness, but it's calm now, I'm breathing, Grzegorz, I'll meditate with Grzegorz soon, we'll think about it, something won't be fine. You'll be fine. happy And you did something interesting today yes yes Look, someone's ringing again. Grzesiek set a bell like this one, like when we have a barn bell and he thinks that he walks and opens it. Now I know, now you know, because now it's loud and before I had muted and he is, you know, so subdued, you see, we were supposed to show some more ideas for gifts, do you have any ideas, there are a lot of ideas, patches, patches, you can lean on, hide away, for the holidays, hide away with us at a promotional price See here they are still cheap, it's worth buying here it was supposed to be ordered for you no matter what kind of patches they are Well, they can be included in the patches - trip on trips Well, we used to go on trips, they traded, and now we started Unfortunately , we have to sit here in our closet where are the Hondas ? The whole wardrobe is all patches and sometimes someone will come to you. Show me what patches you have. But you have to see it on the website motozloty.com because here they are there. Big wolves. Look how many we have. Wilków Wilków is the USA and the sheriff o Greetings to the sheriff from there is a Polish sheriff here we have various different American Road 66 military o look at the bottles, no one has wanted one yet, you give the bottle for free Okay, I'm done in this vat Now I don't know Let's see how these vlogs will be they looked like something something something there I will definitely be there something I can't stand it and I will probably add something Grzegorz maybe he will be a correspondent we will do medium correspondent Okay, I'm leaving, high five Take care, have a nice evening Hello at the end Listen, let me advertise my lovely, lovely shop, motozloty.com If you are looking for an idea for a gift as a gift for yourself for a loved one for a guy for a husband for a boy for a grandfather uncle grandmother uncle you 've come to the right place Go to the website motozloty.com and there you will find millions of ideas for gifts patches pins signs signs sheet metal We have a lot of it there, you have a discount code from 100 in the description PLN free shipping I will be glad if you come to me, hey, I don't put out the fire because I don't put it out because you were always supposed to put the fire out, not that I need a fire extinguisher and I need a fire extinguisher and|||WHICH IS NOW IN RUINS. SOME OF THE VICTIMS OF THE WAR
IN UKRAINE ARE ALSO SOME OF THE MOST HELPLESS WE’RE TALKING
ABOUT ANIMALS FAMILY PETS AND ONE ANIMAL SHELTER HEER IN PALM
BEACH COUNTY IS LITALERLY GOING TO INCREDIBLE WINGS. THOSE DOGS OVERSEAS. ALL RIGHT AS THEIR STORY FROM
BIG DOG RANCH RESCUE. THE FOLKS HERE AT BIG DOG RANCH
RESCUE HAVE BEEN HELPING WITH DOGS IN UKRAINE EVER SINCE THE
BEGINNING OF THE WAR. THEY’VE BEEN WORNGKI WITH A
SHELTER IN ROMANIA. BUT RIGHT NOW THAT SHELTERS I
ABSOLUTELY PACD.KE SO THE FOLKS HERE AT BIG DOG
RANCH HAVE DECIDED TO TAKE MATTERS TO THEIR OWN HANDS AND
OPEN UP ANOTHER BIG DOG RANCH THIS ONE IN POLAND. THIS IS A COMMONITE S RIGHT NOW
IN MANY UKRAINIAN CITIES DOGS. JUST ROAMI THENG STREETS, BUT
THEY’RE NOT STRAYS. WE'R’ NOT TALKING STRAIGHT DOGS. THESERE A PETS THAT WERE LEFT
BEHIND BY PEOPLE THAT ARE DECEASED DUE TO THEAR W OR HAVE
HAD TO FLEECE SUDDEYNL MANY OF THE DOGS LIKE THIS E ONARE
INJURED WOUNDED IN THE BOMBINGS. THESE ARE THE IMAGES THAT
COMPELLED LORI SIMMONS TO HPEL THESE DOGS ARE JUST STARVING
OVER THERE THAT NOBODY TO CARE FOR THEM. LAURIE RUNS BIG DOG RANCH RESCUE
AND LOCKSAHATCHEE GROVES BIG DOG HAS ALREADY SAVED MORE THAN A
HUNDRED UKRAINIAN DOGS BY MOVING THEM TO A SHELTER IN ROMANIA,
BUT THERE ARE SIMPLY MORE DOGS THAN THERE IS ROOM. SO LAURIE IS NOW MAKING ROOM
OPENING A BIG DOG RANCH SHEERLT IN POLAND THE FIRST DOGS ARRIVE
AT THE SHELTER ON TUESDAY. THERE ARE UKRAINIANS THAT ARE
COLLECTING. DOGS THE PETS THAT WERE LEFT
BEHIND AND THE DEVASTATED AREAS BRINGING THEM TO US LORI LEAVES
FOR POLAND ON WEDNESDAY. SHE’LL RUN THE SHELTER THERE FOR
ITS OPENING DAYS TO MAKE SURE EVERYTHING GOES SMOOTHLY. SHE WILL BE VERY CLOSE TO THE
WAR WHICH IS SOMETHING THAT MAKES HER NERUSVO, BUT SHE SAYS
THIS I ASLSO SOMETHING SHE HAS TO DO HOW DO YOU SAY NO THESE
DOGS HAVE LOST? THEIR FAMIEILS THEY’VE LOST
THEIR HOME. THEY’RE THEY’RE STARVING. THEY’RE NOT STRAIGHT DOGS. THEY DON’T KNOW HOW TO FEND FOR
THEMSELVES AND LORI TELLS ME SHE PLSAN TO OPERATE THIS SHELTER IN
PONDLA FOR ABOUT SIX MONTHS. IDEALLYHE T WAR ENDS AND THEY
REUNITE THESE DOGS WITH THEIR FAMILIES OR AT LEAST PUT THEM
INTO LOVING HOMES IF YOU WOULD LIKE TO HELP BIGOG D RANCH WITH
THIS EFFORT, WE’VE PUT ALLHE T INFORMATION YOU NEED ON OUR
WEBSIT|||Ta Dahh! here we go The Poland Experience episode 
number two with an old old friend of mine bianca   from brazil if you don't know our backstory we met 
in what was it 2000 and 2009 2009 we both worked   for ringling brothers in barnum valley circus many 
many many years ago it's like another life yeah so   i was shocked when i put that facebook post out 
and i said oh you know oliver being that you know   you know welcome to the world oliver lombardo and 
you're like oh you're in poland it's like yeah   yeah i'm living in poland oh me too it's like what 
do you mean you're in poland yeah so we're going   to start with how did you out of you know all 
the travels and things are going on in your life   how did you get to poland we would have to go back 
like about six years ago i was planning a trip to   india so i went to india for about three months to 
study yoga and there i met lots of polish people   and i really enjoyed their vibe and everything and 
of course i kind of felt in love with a guy there   but nothing very serious so um i went through 
lots of personal changes in my life related to   my previous relationship so i was living in states 
back then and yeah after one month i changed   everything i i packed my bags and i just decided 
to come to poland to meet him mateos my my husband i was not planning to settle down here i just like 
you know i'm just gonna go there for a few months   and see how it's gonna go that's how it always 
happens that's how it that's how it usually is   like oh i'm just gonna go try it for a couple 
months or i'm gonna take a trip and then you you   never go back to where you were going to yeah 
i was like summer or beginning of summer and   yeah i came but i was i think i was kind of 
ready because i came with lots of bags anyway   and yeah i just stayed yeah i just stayed 
and yeah that was the beginning of the story   so you didn't love me so you hadn't visited 
poland before i never even heard much about   poland before in my life i didn't even know much 
about you know anything about poland really yeah   at all at all i was like kind of googling before 
to try to know more a little bit about the history   or what is in the map or which borders with each 
country is like it was really like i didn't know   much at all and you just said i met this guy i'm 
gonna you know i'm in a terrible situation back   over here where i'm at i need to get out of 
this thing i'm packing my bags and i'm going   to this country yeah yeah i mean i had to like 
you know i i didn't feel living estates anymore   when i was back in states and i had a different 
options to go to different countries for work and   and other things but i felt coming here and i felt 
meeting him so i was like you know i'm gonna give   a try so i came and i don't regret it at all zero 
regrets coming regrets yeah like how hot how easy   or hard was the immigration process it's very hard 
very very hard i just stopped dealing with them   like this month for example and i'm married since 
2016. yeah it was like such a big and long process   wow yeah five years yeah i just got my permanent 
resident status which is like after five years   so long that's incredible yeah i don't know if 
it's um uh because i'm i'm brazilian i i you know   most of the times when we need to resolve some 
situation or fill up new papers that will join   is my husband doing and dealing and talking to 
them in polish so i am kind of not really into   what is going on or why things are like this 
because he's taking care of all those things   very often but i just know it's take a long time 
it's just like five years i can't imagine i i   had to wait a year and about a year and a half 
for my temporary residence call yeah mine too   but for the permanent one it took me that long 
five years yeah so what was what's the biggest   difficulty besides everything has to be 
in polish um i think it's just like time   for me i think it's like a rule in my case 
that is only after five years to get the   permanent residence that's just that's a policy 
yeah you have to be here for that amount of time   before you're granted that yeah did you have to 
learn polish no i have to learn polish if i if   i think it's after seven years or after 10 
years that if i want to apply to have like   a citizenship for example to have the passport 
then i will have to learn polish and do like a   proper exam and things like that yeah 
man i know it takes such a long time   it really does yeah even for simple stuff i'm 
saying why does this why does it take so long all   the papers why can't this be electronic and was it 
like we had a very very funny um situation when i   was pregnant and we were trying to accelerate 
the process to get the papers to get married   and because i was pregnant so we went to ujan 
and we tried to talk to them and they're like   no we cannot accelerate and we don't even know if 
the baby is is your baby if he's a polish baby and   you're like whoa okay that's hysterical yeah can't 
accelerate this process yeah no i i think i think   we tried the same thing and we one of my friends 
has a contact in uh or shot and it's like no   no you gotta wait your turn it seems that 
everything is very very very slow get your   patients together people and complicated 
so how different is the immigration process   from brazil to poland like i think it was a huge 
difference is it quicker easier much quicker you   know after you have your marriage certificate 
you just you know apply in the consulate for the   passport and you know and that's it you don't 
need to do a portuguese test or anything like that   no portuguese test no did you hire a firm to 
help you with all your documents or did you   no no no no my husband he did everything yeah 
yeah everything even the interview as you go   for an interview yeah yeah yeah i went for 
an interview um just this month when i went   to get the the permanent uh status and i had 
to go with a friend so he couldn't help you   in that interview no he cannot be in the same 
room because they're kind of making questions   to me and then they kind of make the same 
questions to him and see if the answers they match   like where do you put to the vacuum cleaner in 
your house seriously yeah that's a question yeah oh well yeah what we're gonna do who goes to the 
grocery shop uh shopping uh more often and things   like that serious questions here security 
is really tight seriously they don't want   people putting their vacuum cleaner into different 
places in this country not here yeah not here   not allowed no so yeah for the interview 
i had i felt like i could have made it   through my interview for my for my karto pabetsu 
because the woman spoke english you're told like   no one's going to speak english but you're alone 
i wasn't alone i brought a friend too but i feel   we were waiting for this person to come and 
she was saying why do you need it you don't   need to you don't need a person you know to 
help you i'm like i don't know if you speak   english like we were told everyone says get a 
person yeah right hire someone and the prices   are rather expensive to hire someone to help you 
with translation yeah man yeah so yeah that was   i had the impression that she did uh you know she 
could understand everything that i would respond   to my friend in english but she was just with 
the poker face and kind of like pretending that   she just the polish poker face i love that that's 
one of my favorite things here like how you doing   good to see you no yeah yeah yeah there are some 
people like our nate we are very lucky to have   a neighbor that they are very friendly and we 
hang out together all the time but usually i   think most of the people they are very serious 
about like interacting super yeah that's a huge   if we really go back to that question so that's a 
big thing i have like friends that sometimes they   come to poland to visit or whatever and they're 
like why poland people don't smile like they   think like they they are sad all the time it's 
like you know they're just you know very serious   how do you think the government could make this 
better how could the government improve efficiency   or what's one of the things the time limit for 
you to get the permanent residence that's the   time limit that's that's just what it is but like 
meanwhile i would say you know how to make the   process a little smoother yeah i think just a bit 
quicker and you know less papers less things and   you know like when they feel like there is a 
couple already with a baby and their marriage   like why complicate things for so long you know 
what i mean it's like you know it just makes sense   it's a you know it's a new family you know give 
you know the the status of a resident and so i   can travel with our problems and things like 
that it's just like in brazil it's like that   if you prove you're married you have a family 
it's like oh okay fine come on in settle down   yeah maybe because he is very um they don't 
want so many foreigners here like i don't know   you hear that you definitely hear that about 
you know poland not taking certain refugees or   migrants and and you know limiting the 
numbers you know which i mean it's their   country they have the right to do that 
i feel but i also feel that you could   you could make things easier digitally right you 
don't need to go to the line and stay for hours   to just drop off documents yeah right i had 
to wait you're waiting three hours to go hand   in a piece of paper yeah like come on you 
know just there's got to be a way that you   can log into a portal upload a document and it's 
official it's safe and away you go yeah definitely   yeah i know that i had two tries of with the 
card simple better the first one uh we waited   a long time like you were saying the second 
time around i was working with the foundation   that i'm employed through and they were 
like just go to window whatever it is 7b   and i'm like 7b what do you mean just go to 
windows 7b just go grab a number maybe five   minutes you'll wait drop your documents off and 
away you go i'm like is this gonna get the right   person yeah yeah it will no problem just go drop 
your documents off sure enough roll up together   and cut the pizza find whatever that's not the 
real number 7b i'm just making this up for the   story and drop them in pick the number drop them 
off no problem yeah so just a little tip for you   you don't always have to wait in line next time 
you want to do this process okay in the next five   years whatever but yeah there's definitely one 
you can go and just drop drop stuff off that and   it made it so much simpler but yeah digital eyes 
when you don't know like the process you're just   like oh okay let's wait and see yeah yeah when you 
don't know it's an issue but when you go through   it and you have more experience that's what it's 
all about after a few years after a couple of   years yeah yeah so you come to poland for a person 
yeah how did you meet this person the first time   did you you know where was it how did this 
all happen the story tell me your love story   all right so i was traveling in india as i told 
you and towards the end of my trip i met matos yeah and you know it was really nice 
we had many things in common and was   very nice to spend time with him and then 
we decided to travel a bit more together   but i was just like we were together but we 
didn't have any plans to be together of course   uh he has his life going on i had 
my life and we're like okay bye bye   so i went back to states tried to figure out 
my own life there he came back to katowice   i was thinking about which country to move i got 
some job offer and some country in the middle east   and or i was thinking about moving to california i 
was a bit confused and then talking to him we were   having contact every day talking uh 
every day on the phone or through skype   so we are kind of very bounded but even though 
we're abundant we didn't have any plans to be   together or anything like that but it like 
this subject came up like oh why not poland   so why not you come to poland and see and 
i was like all right okay so i checked the   flight tickets and i packed my stuff i can't 
so yeah where'd you stay when you got here   in where where did you stay when you're in here 
in katowice you just went right to what you   you moved right into get out of here yeah you 
just moved right into matteo's apartment yeah   that's crazy yeah yeah it was it 
was a time where he was living in a   big apartment with other people like roommates and 
was kind of very cool because we're like different   open-minded people and doing different things some 
people like stew students other people working and   you know it felt very very very nice and it was 
also my first experience of having roommates of   course after quite some time you want some 
more privacy and you don't wanna you know   be in a shared apartment but in the beginning 
it was really fun it was very very nice that's   ridiculous i meet this guy in india talking over 
the internet says come to poland yeah pack my bags   jumped on a plane and where do i stay not in 
hostel didn't didn't rent my own apartment i just   went right into him with his roommates that's like 
that's i give you that's courage man for real some   people fall like you may be crazy you don't even 
know if this relationship gonna work at all i can   hear the comments right now like you're nuts it's 
like no it was very nice it was very very cool   that's super super awesome did you have a 
polish wedding or a brazilian wedding or both   no we just had a very simple polish wedding 
i was married i was pregnant already   and we just had like a very simple 
ceremony with closed friends so no   massive ceremony the church no crazy party no 
no and i was pregnant you were pregnant and i   know that the polish weddings they are very 
intense oh my god i mean traditionally right   like three days or something and lots of vodka 
and and i was you know it was not a time for us   so just chill yes close friends close family and 
we went out to have some some dinner and it was   very simple like that did your family come over 
from brazil no because you know we're depending   on the ooze on for the paper so we didn't know 
exactly the date we could get married we just   knew one week like you can get married on this 
date and then we're like organizing some court   like okay we're gonna get married next week 
and what's everything like that super quick   decisions bing bang boom yeah in and out making 
it happen yeah it was nothing like how we have   seven months to plan and invite family over you 
know that takes so much planning yeah with an   international wedding of that you know and it's 
not even not even it being of a large scale it's   just there's a ton of planning that goes on for 
stuff like that parents cousins siblings friends   and this idea of getting married in brazil is 
very romantic but at this time of our lives i   don't think we're planning anything like that 
okay especially now with pandemia it's just like   yeah yeah have you been to a polish 
wedding in your time here those traditional   yeah no no i haven't no okay i was going to ask 
you what are the differences between you know a   brazilian wedding and a polish wedding i know like 
those little uh you know games and traditions they   usually do during the polish wedding but i haven't 
been one no no no no you've gotta experience   a polish wedding it's crazy you have to it's 
unbelievable okay i'll wait for you to get married you're on you're on the fence list for sure you're 
coming over definitely all right cool so you've   never been to a polish win that's so crazy no i 
haven't all your friends and stuff here but um   every five years matthieu's family make this 
big family reunion that is about 300 people   do we go somewhere you know and spend like a 
weekend together and that was for me like crazy   like just like probably like a polish wedding but 
like a polish family reunion of 300 people with   like alcohol and kielbasa all day long and like 
crazy stuff time yeah all the time you know in   one of the clubs there's a few clubs i do this 
year once the clubs get open again but you can go   it's like a fake wedding that happens and 
you can go experience a polish running just   in the club you know you have to pay of course 
you're not invited free of charge but yeah um   that's recommended go go do that once the clubs 
open up there's that there's like someone gets   i mean it's a fake bride and groom of course and 
okay but the food and the drink and the dancing oh   that's funny i never heard about that yeah i know 
when i saw the advertisement first i was like what   monica's like yeah like you can go be a guest 
at the wedding you have to pay but it's like   a polish wedding you're like this is a great 
idea you know i would love to bring my friends   something like that bring a suit guys bring a suit 
oh you need to dress up accordingly yeah of course   yeah dude get on your best clubber nice put the 
put the dress on the heels with the makeup on   let's go have fun right yeah man definitely check 
it out after this crazy pandemia is over maybe   yeah what made you say that this is where i want 
to live like what kind of solidified it for you   um yeah i mean it felt very easygoing to be here 
like you know the it's just a very easygoing   lifestyle comparing to united states or brazil 
for example i feel like i feel safe i go out on   the streets i don't feel like that much paranoid 
about being robbed like in brazil or it just feels   easier like of course the language for me is not 
easy it's super difficult everyone every every   person i've interviewed so far has said the same 
thing and every foreigner i talk to says that too   like it's just such a difficult language 
to understand and to speak so so yeah but   safety 100 yeah i feel you yeah the cost of living 
is it's not that that expensive comparing to it's   going up though it's going up yeah it's more like 
kato pizza is becoming more like worse so now yeah   but comparing to rio where i'm from 
it's definitely not that crazy and then   i feel like the quality of life even though we're 
in the city which is katowice i feel that is still   like not crazy busy as a big city you know what 
i mean definitely yeah it's not like the warsaw   hustle and bustle it's not the krakov traffic it's 
like it's it's on a different scale if you will   it's a city and you have all these things readily 
available to you i mean yeah walking distance yeah   exactly jopka florist butcher taylor you go out 
your flat and you have everything available bank   pizza yeah so it has the big city it has a city 
vibe without yeah it's very easy going here i   would say definitely i can agree i can 100 agree 
there isn't the sense of uh i know people say you   know but america isn't it better for you blah blah 
blah and i said well it's a lot it's a lot easier   to live here it's not so much stress yeah you 
know you're not you're not being pounded with   you have to make a million dollars money 
money money money two jobs three jobs   four jobs yes it's yeah people don't and you 
say like i work three jobs and people like   you're crazy yeah like you're you're nuts 
how many jobs did you work was like i worked   i was out from 7am to like 10 p.m at night you 
never saw your kid rarely i was like what are   you doing with your life yeah you're like i'm 
chasing that dollar you're like you're stupid   but i think it's just it's uh it's a you come 
to i don't know if it's in europe in general but   at least here in poland i feel like people give 
more value on staying with family spending time   holidays together and as in states you have a 
free time you want to fill it up your schedule   with another job right so i feel like a huge 
difference um moving to poland but i had that   mentality before as well but i couldn't see it so 
here i felt like oh okay i don't need to be in the   rat race you know super yeah and what was the 
most attractive thing when you were looking   at poland you're doing all this research what 
was the most attractive thing to say i have   all these options of other countries but 
i'm really interested in this country what   was the most attractive thing well i didn't 
chose poland because of attractions right   i came here because of a person but uh when i 
was i saw that like the big green forest here   was like just wall poland is really green and i 
really like that you know everywhere you go you   is surrounded by forests so you can you know have 
uh contact with nature in a very easy going way   yeah you don't need to drive to a national park 
and you know like it's just very accessible to   be in the nature in poland yeah you're the second 
person or actually a few people have said that too   that you just i know that i go out of my house 
and if i just take a left and i drive i don't know   five minutes forest yeah like forest yeah there's 
and in nature is all around you i mean it's   it really is successful when you think about it 
you're not and you're driving you would have to   go out of the suburbs through the city limits get 
out go to the national park um i feel like and   it depends on where you live in america for the 
accessibility to nature but i can definitely   understand your point of view of it was really 
difficult sometimes and you have to go drive   yeah and in rio in brazil the same you know even 
though we have like this abundance of um you know   wild force or beaches you still need to drive 
to get stress in the traffic and you know   the stress in the traffic after you a few hours 
you'll try to relax in this nature spot but it's   not easy to get after you've decompressed from 
all the traveling all the stress you get out   of the car and you're like and then you need to 
get stressed back back you got to go back in the   car to get back to where you were go through all 
that yeah oh my god yeah so what's some of your   favorite nature spots around here um i really 
don't know the name in polish but you know like   um i like to go to this uh kojov park it's just 
like a very short uh park you're talking about   yeah it's a very short uh drive or train uh 
drum um ride i don't know 25 minutes 30 minutes   and yeah we always have lots of fun there it's 
good for kids is we always find places there we   can be alone so there's not a lot of people around 
and yeah it's very calming and relaxing there   so three similarities of poland and brazil and 
three differences okay similarities i would say   uh this type of connection with family which it 
seems very strong here and in brazil is the same   you know like you it's very often that you see 
that younger generation they are like going to   spend holidays with their elders 
and things like that it's very   important for them to have easter together 
christmas together and it seems that the holidays   here they're a bit longer than in the other 
countries maybe because of the catholic church   but i feel like it's very important for them to 
have this time together which in brazil is very   similar as well during the holidays to spend time 
with family um i also feel that people here are   very open and friendly once you meet them once 
you get in the circle yeah but it's like i think   it's a bit easier going than in other countries 
like if you compare to norway for example i feel   that people there they are very close and very 
hard to try to understand if the person is up to   a friendship or not but here it's like you know 
you feel the person it's like it's once you have   the opportunity to talk and you know the person 
open ups is is very easy just like in brazil   um yeah but i would say the number one 
uh similarity is the the family bound   and also the catholic church as well not as 
um let's say strong as in poland i feel that   poland is the most extremist catholic 
country that i ever have been same here   um but yeah in brazil the majority is 
also catholic but not as much as here   yeah i can agree with you with the uh 
holidays feeling longer christmas is   three days yeah yeah yeah 24th 25th 26th yeah that 
was crazy for me like what 26. yeah what are you   doing to 26 like i'm going to work like no no no 
you're not you're sitting home you're going to eat   some more car there's plenty of food to be eating 
still and then easter also you have easter monday   you know so those and then of course other 
holidays and this is going to be a reoccurring   theme i've people love taking off the uh 
oh i have i have a monday after the holiday   oh maybe i'll take tuesday off as well or i'll 
take the friday before and extend my weekends like   people people love doing that here yeah it's very 
similar to extend the holidays or like if you have   a holiday on thursday you just like eat friday 
right so you don't do anything on friday and then   you extend completely that is very uh similar 
as in brazil as well so three differences now   oh the weather for sure that's number one number 
one yeah the lack of sun here it's big i feel like   the summer is very nice but like for example right 
now it's supposed to be spring and it just feels   like an extension of winter still winter um this 
is april april 17th yeah so it feels like most of   the year is gray and cold and then it's like three 
months of hot weather where you can use a t-shirt   and maybe sandals and then just go back to jackets 
and boots so the weather is the main thing and the   lack of sun is big as well for me comparing to 
brazil where it's like sunny mostly all year   and of course like when you want to buy some 
uh let's say something silly like bananas right   you go to the store all the bananas they're green 
that's like 90 percent super green for sure there   will be green so like buying fresh fruits like 
in brazil is it's completely different right you   you can go to brazil and buy a banana or avocado 
and eat on the same day basically and here you   you wait for a week to eat avocado when we 
see it's already bad you need to throw away   because you forgot to eat avocados are so hard 
to get yeah nail here for sure but the cherries   are very good when it's cherry season and 
yeah it's my favorite the polish cherries   but for sure weather fresh fruits give me one more 
one more the differences right yeah and the safety   of course the safety of course here in poland 
i it's like you feel as a brazilian you feel   so free you go out on the street you can open your 
bag and get your cell phone and you know just do   whatever talk on your phone and you're not scared 
that somebody's gonna come and say like look give   me your phone it's mine now or give me your 
shoes it you know it's like that doesn't happen   not well i got i got robbed in katowice not like 
in brazil i forgot the door of my apartment open   i left it open somebody entered and took my my 
wallet but you know we're in the city center so   those things happen but no one ever forced 
you like give your nah like in brazil i got   i got uh the gun pointed on me like two times so 
i know those things there they don't happen here   which makes me feel very safe and relaxed 
especially now that i have a small child   yeah i can totally agree with you with 
you there for sure three things you love   and three things you hate okay i think i'll 
start with the three things i hate because   it comes first okay it's not that i hate the 
language but i it's a love hate relationship   when i arrived here i entered her school in 
a language school so i could be kind of legal   as a student and i entered in um foreign 
school that was supposed to be every day   from monday to friday and with so much work 
and material and i got like i really disliked   and for me it's just very difficult to understand 
the structure of this language it's like it's keep   changing there's so many variations and when i 
think i learn the correct way to say something   there are like more ten different types yes just 
say the same thing i just feel like man i don't   have time to learn this language i need at least 
10 years of living working here yeah it's just   like when i feel i have some time to study polish 
i want to just read something else it's just like   very hard for me but i know it's important 
as a brazilian living in poland and i have uh   you know a son that he's half a brazilian and half 
polish and he's going to preschool now and he gets   home and he starts saying polish things and i'm 
like what are you saying i have the same issue   sometimes with with my son because he'll come and 
i'll say what does that mean and he's like daddy   he looks at me and he's like he'll say it back 
to me i'm like i don't know what you're saying   like i don't man i'm trying also by the way so 
yeah the language i i told you the language is   a loving hate relationship i feel very happy 
when i try to speak polish and people get   excited like whoa bianca you say it in polish 
yeah very good and i feel like i'm proud of myself   i ordered the black coffee one time i was like 
and they were like you speak polish i'm like i   just ordered a coin man that's all i said 
don't ask me anything else so yeah polish   is uh one of the things that i would put on 
this list of hate okay it's not that i hate 100   but it's it is there all right so there you 
go yeah number one number two number two   weather of course come on it could be a bit warmer 
here definitely i agree i love the sun i hear you   however when it's very cold and snowy it's 
very beautiful i really it's it's very   it's like magical when everything is white it's 
like super super nice but when it's just like   wet and rainy and all this like funky weather it's 
just like oh gosh and and i made sometimes beach   you know a very nice beach and baltic sea 
for me it's not considerately to go to swim   maybe some polish people will feel offended by 
i when they tell me i'm going for holiday stood   about taxi like that place is not for holidays 
it's too cold and it's the water's so cold i was   oh we went in august last year yeah i mean it's 
beautiful but it's just way too cold yeah it's   like nonsense oh i hear you those three things um 
yeah for me it's crazy now there are many things   i love about poland and the easy going lifestyle 
here the access to health care and to education is   i would say that is much better than in 
brazil for sure here i get very good and and   fast healthcare comparing to brazil that i 
would stand on the line for many hours and   things like that comparing i mean compared to 
the public health care system the education also   my son he goes to a public preschool and the 
quality of the preschools here it seems much   better than the public schools in brazil i'm 
super impressed with the education system here   and how accessible oh your son's three great 
he can go free of yeah yeah mother gets paid   years one to three stay home with the child paid 
by the by the country and then three years old   no i'm not we're not paying out of pocket for 
nursery school here or day care you can but   we don't in states to go to a university 
you need to invest so much money right   and then you like in-depth and have to work 
instead at the same time or like you need   to pay for many years whatever money you you 
you took from the government right to go to   school and in in poland is different as a 
polish you can go to university for free   yeah so it's like i'm still paying off debt from 
my university and i will be out of school for   close to 15 years now and i'm still paying off 
university debts and i'm not using my university   degree by any means so yeah so in terms of health 
and education comparing to to brazil or to states   because the health in state is extremely expensive 
like i was talking to an american woman other day   that her son broke the arm while in states and 
was about with ambulance and these and that   blah blah blah was i think almost twenty 
thousand dollars because he had surgery   and nights in the hospital and the ambulance and 
blah blah blah blah blah he stayed for a few days   in the hospital and it was about twenty thousand 
dollars and me you know x-rays everything else   right right in states is not less than 500 
yeah so in screw for the bone is a thousand   and in poland it's like you go you do something 
complicated it's like you know it's not that much   money right or none at all no none at all so i do 
feel that the health system and the the education   here of course is much better inter in f in terms 
of you know uh financially or or quality as well   maybe not quality as in states but like public 
equality comparing to to brazil for sure   it is much better 100 yeah yeah i i can agree 
with you on those points how would you rate the   polish health care system here the rate like in 
numbers you mean like give me a number one to ten   poor to superior excellent awesome however you'd 
want to rate it what how would you rate the polish   i mean i can only rate according to the experience 
of the countries i have lived before right   so i would say superior to to brazil 
or in terms of quality for sure um   yeah definitely superior compared to america uh in 
terms of accessibility price yeah superior as well   from my experience being there right even though 
i had health care in in states if i had to do like   i don't know some visit that was after seven 
o'clock or something like that i would have   to end up paying you know 150 dollars 
just for a little chuckle here and there   so that's one of the things i'm so impressed 
of here is that i can call at you know doctors   with lux med i have lux med private health 
insurance and six o'clock i'm not feeling   good call hey we have an appointment for you at 7 
30. 7 30 today yeah 7 30. come on down no problem   so yeah accessibility is is awesome i would say 
easy yeah yeah in brazil even though if you have a   healthcare you need to make an appointment 
maybe you're gonna have to wait for one month   and then you you know if you're ill if you if 
you know it's there is emerge emergency and   non-emergency right so if it's like non-emergency 
who knows how long you're gonna have to wait to   have your appointment seriously yeah wow yeah okay 
that's that's a yeah and here it's like maybe i   mean with nfs that do you have you have public 
health insurance or private health insurance   yeah so i know it's like maybe you might have to 
wait a day for an appointment to get in to see   a doctor but usually it's fairly quickly yeah 
for specialists though i hear it's definitely   longer cardiologists ophthalmologists yeah if you 
need something complicated like i don't know like   a hip surgery or something like that it may take a 
long time a couple months i've heard and even for   an eye doctor i've definitely heard the wait time 
is about two three months to go see an eye doctor   so but then you know in something like that 
it happens that i would just go for a private   doctor yeah so i'll get the appointment there and 
like uh it's not that expensive comparing if i go   to a private doctor in states for example yeah so 
same with the dentist i mean i've gone private to   a dentist and you know some i would say a really 
a really deep cavity that will require some heart   some hard you know drilling and filling and 
sculpting 250s what day yeah okay in states   that would not even be that'd be i mean that'd 
be thousands maybe thousands we got quoted for   one root canal it was 2400 2500 because monaco 
was uninsured and yeah it was 2500 i said we   both agreed it'd be cheaper to fly to poland have 
vacation yeah get her entire mouth fixed yeah fly   back then go visit a dentist when you're uninsured 
yeah and it's not a big deal here it's so like   things with things with that are are in that realm 
i'm just so impressed with that it's that cheap   mm-hmm yeah like 250 yeah that's it yeah do my 
whole mouth man you know yeah when i was living   in portugal um about two years ago we were there 
for one year because matthias was doing erasmus   program and there were a lot of people just flying 
you know portuguese people that lives for example   in switzerland or sweden or whatever they are 
flying from those countries back to portugal just   to get those type of cheaper services and good at 
the same time because you know it's just cheaper   in poland the same i'm pretty sure there 
are people that you know i know people that   for example they live in germany and they 
fly from there here to get their stuff done   yeah go back yeah so yeah it just makes more sense 
no i i hear you definitely so you gave birth here   yeah in poland which which hospital oh god i don't 
know the name of but it's like the hospital worker   i don't know that's where oliver 
was born should we televoy vodski   yeah it's the same hospital where matteos was 
born so it's right off the s1 the highway do   you take that exit and it's on the left-hand 
side maybe maybe they're like i was giving try to get this baby out of my body i don't 
know where i'm being taken yeah walked it was a   okay experience was was good so talk to us about 
the care you received if you remember during birth   but mainly i'm really concerned about after the 
aftercare of mother child care i was going to a   doctor in tehei and i told him in the beginning 
that you know i wanted to to have a more natural   birth as much as possible so he recommended me 
this hospital in tehe that was good we had some   classes in the afternoon in this hospital from 
the nurses on like what works fact during the   pregnancy how to do after and all those you know 
newborn cares and everything and was pretty cool   was free and was like um yeah it was nice the 
experience of giving birth in the hospital was   very positive i felt supported and even though 
we i couldn't communicate at all in english   with them with the nurses matus was he or he were 
allowed he was allowed to be with me all the time   and that is something that usually uh in in 
brazil i don't think it's possible to i didn't   think about that that you don't speak any polish 
and you have polish nurses taking care of you yeah   and you can't even communicate with them you're 
going through this life event of giving birth to   your child but yeah i tell you i was i was there 
for oliver's birth too i was i was around i was   next to monica yeah so even though we didn't speak 
the same language we couldn't communicate i felt   well supported um the after birth i had to stay 
three days as a rule in the hospital and the after   birth i got like many times a visit from a nurse 
to checking the baby to help me to take care of   the belly button thing and how to breastfeed 
and you know like it was really cool i felt   like really well supported like it was very nice 
did you have the midwife coming to the hospital   uh coming to your house yeah after yeah how long 
did that last um it was coming like every week   maybe four times yeah so the first month so it's a 
month of yeah so she was checking the belly button   um checking how to br you know in the beginning 
the breastfeeding it's complicated right sometimes   i have no experience you know like uh it's 
sometimes it's too much milk production and   then many things happen anyway she was like 
giving really good tips and how to baffle the   babyship bath him with me and how to hold how to 
put to sleep how to make comfortable she was like   really giving out her experience and like yeah it 
was very natural for her and it was very natural   for me too even though i didn't know her it was 
i felt like she was a very nice person to be in   my house in that moment yeah i can agree with 
you there i was i was shown how to bathe oliver   dress him you know if he had the colic or the 
stomach issue and turn the baby over pat like   this put the baby on your chest lay down like 
this it's like i would have never thought about   that yeah for me it was really important because 
you know i'm all my family is back in brazil so   i don't have like support from my mother or my 
grandmother i don't have their type of wisdom   in in this subject they can tell me something 
on the phone but they are not there physically   so having this woman from time to time was really 
helpful yeah i agree yeah it's such a great thing   here i would say all right so now let's let's 
move forward to some schools and such how do you   how do you what are some differences between 
preschool and brazil and preschool here yeah in   poland the preschools um in brazil they are good 
if they're um not from the government let's say if   they're like private private yeah so you have all 
those different options those extra classes and   very nice toys and playground and things like 
that if it's public it's probably the quality   it's not that good and you know public teachers 
they don't pay they are not paid that well so   maybe sometimes they don't even 
they they they don't go to work   and then you know the kids are like okay no 
teachers today so probably the parents need   to take them back home and then they miss a 
day of work so i think it's more complicated   teachers aren't paid well here either the 
teachers are not paid very well for sure and uh   i noticed that the i can say the pat 
excuse me the passion with the teachers is   superb man yeah they really love what they do 
right so you have it's it's not as accessible   in brazil public preschool to preschool here 
in poland yeah i would say that i feel much   um i feel that it's safer for studio if i need to 
choose between private and public school here in   brazil it's safer for syria for my son to be in 
a public school in poland than in brazil for sure   that's like 100 that's how i feel you haven't 
looked more into like primary schools or   you're not there yet so no i mean it gets worse 
right as the kids are older and the schools   the public schools system in brazil it got worse 
so in terms of security and things like that   right same here with america you know like i think 
we had another school being shot up last week or   there was another event and there's been multiple 
shootings in the past month i know that so   security wise i'm always saying that i 
feel much better with him going to school   here yeah and i mean the public school is so clean 
yeah it's kept very clean it's organized it's   tidy i mean you can smell it how clean it is 
and you know what he's eating what type of food   food is oh i can't believe the food you know fresh 
vegetables fresh potatoes fresh meat and he said i   had duck the other day i'm like you had duck where 
did you have duck in school with daddy i'm like i i don't know can we get some duck in here like 
could we make that happen for real so yeah and   he's yeah the the food and the quality of food 
you know i remember our meals in my school were   definitely not the healthiest preservatives not 
the freshest stuff yeah microwave stuff yeah   yeah the microwave you know pre-made meals frozen 
unfrozen here's like fresh fruit fresh vegetables   fresh meat comb pots juices so i would just say 
overall the quality of uh education as a whole is   is much better from the ground up plus 
as you're saying public universities   and such yeah all right what's something you would 
tell someone moving to poland what would you tell   them like if someone's like i don't know if it's 
a good fit if i should come what should i do   you should definitely try if you have this calling 
right because of some reason let's say like   i i'm part of like those facebook groups let's say 
brazilians in poland and from time to time there   are lots of brazilians they like um you know 
it's easy for brazilian people to come to pola   if they had like let's say a grand grandparent 
that it's polish because we we received lots of   polish uh people after the second world war so 
they we have an agreement between countries that   brazilian people can come and sometimes people 
they are wondering like oh maybe i should come   like how is life there or you know it 
it's always the same like you should try   you should come and definitely it feels much 
safer than in brazil the lifestyle is easy going   of course if you if you're coming from a tropical 
country it's gonna feel sometimes a bit harsh the   winter pack that coat but you really need to learn 
how to dry i didn't know how to dress myself like   same here i didn't know and sometimes i would see 
a sunny day and i was like oh i'm going on a you   know on a t-shirt outside and then after one hour 
was freezing cold really you you those things you   know you need to learn with time as a foreigner 
but yeah i i feel that is a very friendly   piece this going uh place to to to be it's it 
feels nice to be here when we're in malaysia   because of kovid we couldn't come back we got our 
flights back to poland council three times uh when   i got here it felt like ah so nice relief right 
yeah it feels like oh so nice to be back yeah it   feels nice of course when the winter comes i want 
to get out for for a few weeks but it always feels   like nice to be back all right no i want to thank 
you for coming on the show today thank you thank   you very nice for your advice to the audience 
and such and uh i hope to see you soon yeah   personally yes so as you guys hang out play days 
with the kids definitely great thank you thank you|||Hejka! Co tam Właśnie przygotowuję się do… wyjazdu na lotnisko bo dzisiaj jedziemy do Polski jest teraz 7:15am i przesyłam mój najnowszy filmik jadę na dwa tygodnie więc będę nagrywać całe dwa tygodnie przynajmniej tak myślę Nie wiem, czy będziemy robić coś fajnego
lub nie ale i tak was zabiorę na przejażdżkę mają tu Burger Kinga zazwyczaj nie jem Burger Kinga no ale może jednak coś zjem bo jestem trochę głodna nasza brama otwiera się tak o 11 cos a jest dopiero około 10 więc mamy jeszcze dużo czasu wyszło na chicken burgera "Peach Iced Tea" moje ulubione picie ~ kupiłam też nową czapkę, pasuje mi do
stroju heheh pszczoła Mogę się mylić ale myślę, że jesteśmy we Francji jeśli tak, to poszło naprawdę szybko bo... przysięgam, że to trwa dużo dłużej, żeby przelecieć przez ocean Dotarliśmy do domu i co robimy pierw jak tylko dojedziemy ? Jedziemy do KFC! Dzień Dobry! jest teraz 8:04 / 8:05 Obudziłam się tak z 30 minut temu lub coś koło tego Właśnie z grałam wszystkie klipy z wczorajszego nagrania na mój laptop zaraz zacznę edytować pierwsza część mojego vloga spróbuję zrobić 1 dzień dziennie żeby mi było łatwiej edytować właśnie skończyłam edycję Dzień 1 dzisiaj idziemy na stadion idziemy tylko pochodzić i do sklepiku muszę się niedługo szykować tak.. teraz lub za chwile to stadion widzewa jakby ktoś chciał wiedzieć dotarliśmy na stadion teraz idziemy do sklepu kibica mój tata może wybierze sobie kilka rzeczy bo jutro idzie na mecz i pochodzimy trochę bo był odnowiony czy coś Nie wiem nie jestem wielkim fanem piłki nożnej no
ale… przyszliśmy do… do takiej jakby hali handlowej / centrum może? trochę się pochodziłam po sklepach szukałam żelu… w zasadzie kremu w żelu ​​do twarzy znalazłam jakiś, ale nie kupiłam go tylko dlatego, że może znajdę lepszy gdzieś
indziej znalazłam też kilka soczewek kontaktowych i mają tyle kolorów do wyboru zdecydowanie kupie jedna lub dwie pary nie wiem jeszcze które, ale jakieś na pewno i… może teraz pójdziemy coś zjemy tyle lodów do wyboru tymczasem w Wielkiej Brytanii każda maszyna
do lodów w MC jest zepsuta zjadłam "chikker'a", kole i czekoladowe lody był lepszy niż chicken mayo lody też świetne nie nagrywam za dużo dzisiaj bo byliśmy tylko w sklepach mieli też fotobudkę i chciałam użyć no ale nie mieliśmy drobnych więc nie udało mi się użyć tym razem zaczęłam edytować Dzień 2 żeby być do przodu ale raczej tak się nie stanie Hejka Z tego co wiem teraz jesteśmy tutaj w domu mojej cioci zjemy obiad posiedzimy trochę i odpoczniemy a pozniej moze pojedziemy do Port Łódź które jest centrum handlowym tyle bluzek do wyboru Dosłownie nie mogę się zdecydować które z nich chcę podoba mi się ta ale lubię też te na tej pisze “Milk shake” i na dole jest truskawka bardzo słodka jest też dużo anime w sklepach trudno był nie kupić wszystkiego na koniec pojechałyśmy do Port Łódź troche trudno się tu nagrywa bo zawsze wszędzie gra muzyka poszliśmy do Croppa Kupiłam 3 koszulki maja teraz jakąś wystawę Parku Jurajskiego więc wokół jest dużo dinozaurów czas na lody! mango sorbet + Marakuja Sorbet Dostajesz taki duży rozmiar i wybierasz 5 dodatków po prostu niesamowite Czas na mały haul w Croppie kupilam ten top a z tyłu są anime oczy Mieli też BT21 tak oficjalne BT21 potem poszliśmy do innego sklepu nazywał się Sinsay tam kupiłam ten naprawdę śliczny crop top i ten słodki breloczek do telefonu To mój dzisiejszy OOTD nie jest tak źle dziś Założyłam moją nową bluzkę i pasuje dobrze nawet słodki właśnie zrobiłem kilka zdjęć ~ znalazłam też bubble tea może pojadę później bo wątpię, że pójdę teraz Poszłam na kręgle z rodzicami i dziadkami było zabawnie, i wszyscy całkiem nieźle
grali WYGRAŁAM!!! WYGRAŁAM!!!! oczywiście musiałam zagrać w kosza nie byłam taka zła Dziękuję słodko wygląda gazowana bubble tea ~ nie pamiętam jakie to były smaki ale było
dobre dzisiejszy mukbang się nie kończy kupiliśmy teraz pączki i OMG mam paczka z solonym karmelem pycha powiem wam jedno Polskie pączki są jedną z najlepszych rzeczy na świecie i są ogromne znaleźliśmy to miejsce nazywa się Łódź Sweet Factory i wygląda super tak pastelowo, naprawdę mój klimat było tam tyle cukierków że trudno było
wybrać wyszłam za limit …. oops~ jesteśmy na Piotrkowskiej która jest…. bardzo długą ulicą chyba najdłuższą ulicą w Europie? ale mogę się mylić Jest taka ładna Uwielbiam nią chodzić Zawsze robię tu zdjęcia więc uważaj na moje kolejne zdjęcie bo pewnie niedługo je zrobię czy to w ogóle wycieczka do Polski jeśli
nie zjesz świeżej waty? wyszło na to że kupiliśmy watę cukrową to … jest podobno “mała” … przeszliśmy się przez resztę Piotrkowskiej
zeby dojsc na tramwaj oto i ona, stajnia jednorożców ~ tak.. tak
się nazywa Herro~ szczerze nie zrobiłam prawie nic z tego co mówiłam że zrobię
wczoraj więc…to znaczy tak no poszłam do fryzjera ale była jakaś rodzinna sytuacja czy coś poszłam przełożyć na dzisiaj więc idę o 12:00 w tej chwili jest… 10:00 coś właśnie jem śniadanie mam naleśniki z nutellą skończyłam się szykować jest za 25 12:00 czy coś takiego mam zamiar wyjść za 5-10 minut żebym się nie spóźnić ale żebym nie była za wcześnie byłam wcześniej czas znowu wypalić włosy yay! prawie gotowe włosy zrobione i… jak widzicie wyglądają trochę inaczej niż zwykle Poprosiłam o “Korean Curtain Bangs” oczywiście nie jestem koreanką więc będzie wyglądać trochę inaczej Podoba mi się, podoba mi się kolor bardziej przypomina beżowy blond są też wyprostowane na szczotke więc są trochę bardziej… napuszone Zdecydowanie obcięłam więcej niż myślałam ale znowu… potrzebowały cięcia więc... czemu nie kolejna podróż do KFC~ co innego jak nie Kubełek Chicken Wings kupiłam też grejpfrutową lemoniade (bardzo
dobra) mały timelapse jak jem skrzydełka z kurczaka~ zapomniałam zakończyć vlog…
mam nadzieję że podobał wam się #Tydzień 1|||When you will be doing business in Poland you will have to pay some taxes First of all, you will have to pay a VAT tax. This is obligatory for all companies with turnover exceeds $200,000 which means the majority of companies will pay it it is basically 23 percent for all goods and services majority of them have this rate some of them top eight five four zero percent depending on the industry and depending if the good is delivered inside the country or outside the same applies to services, but basically what you should remember is 23% of VAT Another tax is CIT, which means corporate income tax in this case Most of the time you will have a flat rate which is 19 percent when you start a business You have something which is called a discount for a start. And in this case the tax rate would be nine percent pretty nice this tax rate can be applied for the enterprises which have an income lower than 1.2 million euros loss per year there are some exceptions from this rule and Actually there ho there is a whole list of exceptions I would just like to tell you that there is a window that you might be the lucky one who would buy nine percent The third type of tax is your personal income tax when you get some income from your company in terms of sole proprietorship you will either pay your corporate income tax or You will have your personal income tax in this case. It is divided into three Thresholds first one is 18 percent For let's say approximately eighty five point five polish złotych You will a 18 set of tax for this amount up to this amount And then the second threshold is between eighty five point five up to 1 million. You will have to pay 32% from this amount and then the third threshold is additional 4% so summarize you have eighty five point five and you have 1 million here is a 18% here is 32% and here is 36% But what is worth remembering? You have to consider that when you have the company you first earn your income then you deduct your cost and you pay the tax from what is left and That is the big advantage of having business in general|||Poland and Ukraine Flags.|||Last month, The European Union took an unprecedented
step against Poland, one of its member states. The Union invoked its strongest sanction against
the country, which could strip it of its voting rights within the bloc of nations. The move is so extreme, that many foreign
policy experts have even called it the EU’s diplomatic “nuclear option.” But what led to this historic decision, and
what exactly does it mean for everyone involved? First let's start with the move by the European
Union on December 20th, 2017. The European Commission, which is the executive
wing responsible for implementing laws in the EU, announced that it was triggering Article
7 of the Union’s Treaty. This action was a big deal too, because it
was also the first time it had ever been used in history. Article 7 was created to prevent nation’s
in The Union from adopting policies that threaten democratic institutions, like legislative
or judicial branches of government. To be implemented, the measure has two key
parts that must be approved. First, after the motion has been triggered,
it has to be approved by four-fifths of all Union members and have the backing the european
parliament. After that, the European Council gives the
nation in question a formal warning and recommendations. The country then has three months to respond,
before E.U. members have to unanimously vote to launch
sanctions and suspend the nation’s voting rights. That makes it pretty hard for these types
of measures to go into effect. So while the triggering of Article 7 remains
historic and could lead to sanctions against poland, it’s pretty much seen as just a
symbolic gesture by the EU. But why Poland and why now? The triggering of Article 7 came as Poland's
parliament approved controversial laws that could limit the independence of its judicial
branch. The laws have been seen as consolidation of
power for the nation’s right-wing Law and Justice party, which currently hold the most
seats in parliament and the presidency. The judicial reforms would essentially allow
a ruling party to select lower-level judges and dismiss many of the nation’s Supreme
court Judges. That is what the European Union has a problem
with. They say this type of political interference
with the judicial branch is a risk to the rule of law in Poland, which is a fundamental
value of the European Union. "Sadly, our concerns have deepened. Within a period of two years, a significant
number of laws have been adopted -- 13 in total -- which put at serious risk the independence
of the judiciary and the separation of powers in Poland." While historic, the motion by the EU didn’t
just come out nowhere either. Since the Law and Justice party came to power
in 2015, they’ve adopted multiple laws that have affected the judiciary branch. The EU even warned Poland’s President that
it might trigger the “nuclear option” if he signed the bills into law, which he
did anyway. This all brings us to the reaction and whether
this will have a lasting impact on Poland and the European Union. While many EU members have voted to take the
measure against Poland, not all members plan on supporting the implementation of Article
7. Hungary, another central european country
that has faced criticism from the EU over its right-wing, populist policies, has said
it plan to veto the union’s actions. And since the next phase of the implementation
requires a unanimous vote by European Union members, the action is pretty much dead in
the water. Meaning, Poland’s Law and Justice party’s
consolidation of power appears to be set to continue for at least the near future. The recent laws passed by Poland’s Law and
Justice Party really shouldn’t come as a surprise. Since it gained power in 2015, the nation
has become increasingly nationalistic. But what other countries around the world
have seen a rise in nationalism last year? Find out in the video to the right! Thanks for watching NowThis World! And please, don’t forget to like and subscribe
for more every week!|||After only about 3 months of signing the contract, 24 K9PL self-propelled guns were delivered to the Polish army according to information published on November 6, 2022 This is remarkable progress The handover of K9PLs is a key milestone in the development of partnership between Hanwha Aerospace and the Government of Poland said Lee Boo-hwan, head of Hanwha Aerospace’s European business According to the contract between Poland and Korea, by 2026, Hanwha will deliver about 100 K9PL self-propelled guns to Poland and will also be produced domestically by Warsaw Hanwha Aerospace also plans to build a logistics support center in Poland, where European countries using K9 guns can send them in for maintenance Currently, the countries operating the K9 Thunder self-propelled howitzer include South Korea, Turkey, Poland, India, Finland, Norway, Estonia, Australia and Egypt The US is also testing the K9 Thunder self-propelled howitzer and the K10 ammunition supply vehicle  to demonstrate compatibility with its various ammunition The introduction of the K9 Thunder aims to supplement and replace the K55 155mm self-propelled howitzer of the South Korean armed forces In 1998, the project was accepted and in 1999, K9 was mass-produced Up to now, the K9 has become the most popular self-propelled gun in the world with more than 2,000 units already in service globally The howitzer can deliver consistent, accurate, rapid effects at a range of up to 40 km with high rates and volumes of fire In particular, the K9 is optimized for “Shoot-and-Scoot” capability to fire multiple rounds  and immediately move to a different location to avoid potential counter-fire The main weapon is the 155mm gun. It has a burst rate of fire of three rounds per 15 seconds  and a maximum rate of fire of six to eight rounds a minute for three minutes Sustained rate of fire is two to three rounds a minute for one hour The gun’s firing is controlled by onboard fire-control equipment The information can be transmitted through a data digital radio link or voice communications The automatic loading system places the projectiles onto the ammunition tray ready for fire The K9 Thunder can open fire within 30 seconds at stand out position or within 60 seconds during movement With a price of 10 million USD with the K-10 ammunition truck, or 6 million USD only for the cannon the K9 is one of Korea's most popular weapons thanks to its top-notch technical and combat features as well as its relatively reasonable price|||Hush, hush, hush Blush, blush, blush You are now my big fat- C R U S H ☆ I'm single as I can be You're single, perfect for me~ I'm gonna give you a bunch of reasons on why you should date me! Reason #1: I'm super hot 🔥 Reason #2: She's super noooooot... Reason #3: I'm all you got and all you got is someone hot! 🔥 Boy, check my resume You want a background check, okay! First name's Hot, and last name Bitch ;) Wanna get with me? Now that's the sitch(?) You think I'm trash? Hell no, I'm class! And I got a big fat ass ;))))))))))))) And all I gotta say is, "Please date me!" Because I'm sin-gle S-I-N-G-L-E Love me! And hug me! And touch me ;) And... well... *nope*|||I worked as a KFC service staff member. I was a university student. I used to work with some blokes at a start-up. I worked on a project as a freelancer. I worked at Belarusian Railway. To be frank, I had plenty of time to watch YouTube videos. I felt like I’d reached a glass ceiling and needed to develop in a completely different way. And then I made up my mind to find my calling To change something in my life to start growing. I wished to work with colleagues who have many years of experience  I wanted to work on a project that would keep on evolving. I came for a job interview and I liked it. Right from the start, we got along well. As for communication, it was simple. I've been working already for three years since that communication episode. In six months I got a promotion. After some time, I got second promotion I came from a junior position to become a middle staff member; and relatively recently I have become a Head guy. Now, I am a Tech Lead. I started in First Line Support, while now I am a Team Lead. The company offers good growth opportunities. If you feel like working hard, it is like a Tinder Match. You will be noticed. It happens quickly. Wouldn’t know in English… Talent foundry Every team has its Tech Lead with whom you can talk or say: in six months, I want to be better than I am today. Company supports this. So, the company gives trainings, gives conferences, pay for it  We follow the careers of our people and do our best to guide them. Well, these are not just words; you can see it by the example of your colleagues who have already reached a certain level. We have training courses, English courses or various workshops for the employees to choose. Half a year later, you approach your Tech Lead and say: “Man! Look here, I do think I have improved!" And you discuss it. If it is the case, then the promotion process is initiated. You can climb up the career ladder, yes, you can. But at a certain point you hit the ceiling. Yet, a horizontal growth is an alternative To switch between products so because company has like twelve products Many interesting  projects are carried out concurrently. I would like to be part of them all. It is perfectly understandable that you might fall short of  time and effort;  however, it’s much better than having no choice at all, isn’t it? I want to  develop and grow very much. And I do think that every SOFTSWISS employee shares my mindset. I see the prospects and the opportunities that pushed me to think bigger I have an idea, let’s say, a dream about leading positions on the iGaming market. I am still far away from being on par with the most experienced  guys working for us. I am planning, maybe, to try to catch up with them in the years to come. I understand that I want to develop further. I would like very much to find myself on a leading position in a year or so. In a larger sense, I am planning to grow to a senior position so far to become a manager later. You feel it - how the company grows, how your team grows, how changing your tasks, how you get promoted. Аnd to see how I see myself even three years it’s super hard. In SOFTSWISS it’s possible everything.|||Hey everybody and welcome back to
another Tip Thursday with me Conor Clyne, the Language Tsar, and yes
you are on the right video. It doesn't look like Warsaw, Poland because I'm
actually in Tenerife but this is the video hundred dollars what it can get
you in Warsaw, Poland. The reason I'm shooting this intro in a
different location is because there are gonna be some big changes to this
channel, including the name. I've been playing around with a few different names and don't
be surprised ... it's gonna be the same channel with me Conor so one thing I
wanted to know is what you think about this 100 dollar series. Do you think the
money being should be higher like $500 $1,000? I'm thinking of changing that
as well as I travel around Europe. Keep your comments coming. Write them below! I"m
gonna be talking a lot about not just about languages also about travelling in
the region and how you can have a more locally epic travel experience and also
about dating because I get a lot of questions about dating. Let's get into
today's video which is $100 Warsaw, Poland. So let's start with accommodation here
in Warsaw. Now if you want a nice apartment in the city center it's gonna
set you back about 60 to 80 US dollars. Now you can of course get a lot
cheaper if you go outside of the city center so there it's probably gonna be
costing like 40 or 50 US dollars. I used the Airbnb to find my apartment. It's
kind of my default when I'm traveling and I don't know the city and maybe an
agent for apartments in the city where I'm traveling to. So that's the kind of
price range you should budget for an apartment in Warsaw. So next up is food: a
two course meal in a decent restaurant with drinks in the center of Warsaw seems
to be costing between 17 and say 23 US dollars so we're doing like 15 yeah
approximately 18 or 20 euros depending on where you go and what you eat. Of
course that fluctuates if you want to eat you know fast food is coming a lot
cheaper if you want to go to fine dining if it's gonna be much more expensive but
that's to give you a general ballpark figure and they are the kind of places I've
been eating in so I can talk from personal experience that's the kind of
budget that you should expect for food here in restaurants in Warsaw. So next up
are drinks if you want to go for a cocktail after a long day of sightseeing
here in Warsaw or maybe you just been hanging out with friends or working from
a cafe like a lot of you digital nomads tend to do, it's gonna cost you around 20
zloty which is five dollars 80 cents US pretty much or a little bit under
five euros for a cocktail here in the center of Warsaw and if you want to go
for a local beer that's gonna be about half that so ten zloty so yeah that's
gonna be a little bit more or less three US dollars and if you're a coffee addict
like I am then as you've seen from my Instagram stories I'm always having a
few flat whites somewhere in a nice cafe when I'm working that is gonna cost you
a little bit more than a local beer it's like about 12 zloty as I can see as the
price and that's like about 2 euros 80 or yeah just a little bit over at 3
US dollars that you should budget for. In terms of transport I've been going
around the city actually by Uber and that costs you know more or less between
10 and 20 zlotys so yeah anything from maybe three to five or six US
dollars is kind of the normal price range for a trip here. I didn't take any
official taxis I just use Uber because it's my default go to when I'm traveling
and it's just a lot more convenient and I don't need to download extra apps. So
if you actually use taxi apps here in Warsaw or you know a better option and
please write below in the comments section and help everyone else out who
might be coming here to Warsaw. Now if you feel like going to something
cultural like maybe the National Museum here in Warsaw. That's also gonna cost you
twenty zloty so that's gonna be a little bit under six US dollars a little
bit under five euros for entrance to that. So let's tot all that up and see
what you can get for your 100 bucks around 80 euros. You're gonna be able to
stay in an apartment outside of the city centre, go for two meals in restaurants
and then you can throw in maybe two flat whites, two coffees and maybe a
cocktail, two beers, your uber to the National Museum and you
should be more or less at a hundred bucks. If you've been here and you find
the price range I've given to be too high, too low, you know better ways to
save money then definitely let everybody know in the comments section below the
video. We're building a great community here of people who are interested in
traveling to the more eastern part of Europe in general so definitely help
everybody out and share your experiences and also let me know if you find the
prices here in Warsaw expensive or cheap compared to what you were expecting
maybe where you live or where you're normally travel to do you think that
Warsaw is good value for money or you think it's a little bit more on the
expensive side. That's it for another Tip Thursday. Big thumbs up of course if you
liked the video. Whack the notification bell beside the subscribe button
because you're already a subscriber of course because you watched this video and if
you're not then please go subscribe and I've been working on a new course which
is going to be how to survive a trip to Eastern Europe and that's actually based
on your feedback on my Instagram, Twitter and Facebook poll that I recently had
out so. You gave me a lot of great feedback there .... a lot of really
valuable comments and that seems to be something that a lot of you, my viewers,
are interested in getting more help with. There's a link in the description below
there just have to type in your email and then click confirm on the
confirmation email that you're gonna receive in your inbox and then you will
have access to that free course so I'll see you in the next video. It's 'pa-pa'
from Warsaw which 'bye-bye' in Polish and I look forward to seeing you and your
smiling face pretty soon!|||GOD-HONOR-THE HOMELAND Presents The film promoting Poland. POLISH NATIONAL ANTHEM MATERIALS USED Music:  |||The legend of the Warsaw Mermaid According to warsawtour.pl A long time ago,  when Warsaw was a fishing village,  the sea and the river were inhabited by golden-haired mermaids. One day, one of them set off from the Baltic to the south. She swam along the Vistula, admiring the landscapes she passed,  and when she got tired, she decided to rest on the sandy bank of the river at the foot of  today’s Old Town. The area seemed beautiful to the mermaid. “How nice it is here! Why would not I live here?” she thought, and she did.  During the day she splashed in the shallows and she spent the nights in the deep. She liked to play tricks, and the local fishermen suspected  that someone was stirring the water and taking fish from their nets. “We have to do something about this pest!” they shouted. The mermaid was not scared of the fishermen and began to sing a song about the Vistula. The animals listened to her singing, the beavers raised their snouts from their burrows, and the cormorants sat on drifting logs.  The fishermen were moved so much that they gave up their plans and  promised that they would not harm the mermaid. There was still danger, however, for the mermaid. One day, a greedy merchant decided to get rich on her beautiful voice by putting her on display at fairs. He tricked her, kidnapped her and imprisoned her in a wooden chest. The mermaid, accustomed to freedom, was very unhappy. Her crying was heard by the young son of a fisherman who with his friends released her and punished the evil merchant severely. The joyous mermaid, thankful for being free again, pledged to the fishermen that she would always guard them and their village. Over time, the small fishing village became a large and beautiful city. Today, the image of the mermaid armed with a sword and shield appears  in the coat of arms of Warsaw.|||Republic of Poland USSR (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics/Soviet Union) N*zi Germany (1939) Republic of Poland (Second Polish Republic) Russian Empire German Empire (2nd Reich of Germany) Austria-Hungary Prussia Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth (Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania) Kingdom of Poland|||Hi, very warm welcome! Very warm welcome to each of you! Come see the video where – let’s call it – much has happened! So much has happened, that you, Mr. Editor, forgot about the race… Of a GTR doing 100-200 km/h in barely 3 seconds… Against a twin-turbo R8. So, sit back comfortably and enjoy the show. And such thicc videos like this one... Which we realize both in Poland and USA, by basically combining two videos into one… We’re able to do thanks to your involvement. WWW.7AUT.PL I invite each of you, individually. This is the last event from me, where you can win 7 cars and 30 side prizes. Stop by the website, buy e-books and get the tickets in addition. Enter the game and see the backstage of how we create this channel for you, through the amazing e-books. I hope for the drawing livestream to be a huge event. Also, we prepared a few dope surprises for you. Enter the game and remember, that the Supra you see now… Will be drawn during the first minutes of the livestream, so now is the time to play for it. Without prolonging the introduction, give it a try and I wish good luck to each of you. Remember, your winning chances are equal to zero only, when there’s no tickets to your name. However, like I said – let’s not prolong. I give the floor to myself. We’re moving onto the topic of a car, which has been strongly haunting me for some time. Ever since I was 18, until 23, the R35 GTR’s didn’t cross paths with me… Despite the Godzilla probably being a dream of every kid. Since the Fame GTR, however, I truly fell in love with these cars. I really think, they’re a great base for doing various stuff with them… For example, things like this: Today however, we begin a video under the sign of R35, which will be much wider than the standard R35. We find ourselves under the garage of Łukasz, whom you may remember from the Liberty Walk Huracan project. In addition, that Huracan also has a twin-turbo. There, Łukasz was responsible for the visual part. Come inside then, I’ll show you all the parts in the first minutes of the video… The whole widening pack, the whole idea for the car… And even the wheels, which – come on – aren’t the usual choice. Follow, so we can officially begin the case of Widebody R35 GTR. Welcome very much. Łukasz has such a beautiful garage. Tight but mine. Tight but mine. Beautiful floor, beautiful decorations. Han Golkowicki is with us, as well. No need to introduce that guy, he’s here for a reason. Because the car that’s under the cover, which we’ll show you in a moment… Is the car, to become the brand identity, that we’ll build with Han. But, I don’t f**ing know about the release date. Maybe, it’ll release when the brand is already on the market? No, probably not. I don’t know when this video is gonna come out. It’s f**ked up, how we’re recording this in September, and I don’t know if it doesn’t release in February! Or in 4 to 5 months. I’ll have a f**ing beard in that time. Children! I might have children by then. So, the brand connected with Han – you either already know about it or soon will. But, it’s gonna be very cool and around the topic which interests each of you, I think. Now, having these few words of introduction behind us… Come, we’ll take the cover off and show you the base, that we’ll work on. Looks cool, standing like that. Yo, check this out. This is one of the beautiful things about the R35. Back to order, though. First, let’s discuss the base, that I’m resting my ass on. It’s the R35 GTR from late 2018. This is a car, which interestingly, is in perfect paint condition. That’s because ever since it left a Polish dealership, it’s been wholly covered – including the roof – with a PPF. So, since it was new, it never experienced the streets. What can we say besides that, hybrid turbo’s, the whole MG Motorsport exhaust… And at the moment, 800 HP at 990 Nm of torque. Thus, a very fast machine. A 0-100 km/h in about 2.6-2.7 seconds, I think. Before us, programming this car the same way, like we did the Fame GTR. To have a true flame thrower on four wheels. However, that’s that about the base. Speaking of the body kit, we spread it out and you probably saw it already. Speaking of it, let’s consult the specialist. Who am I to speak. Lucas, by how much is this kit going to widen the GTR? By about 8 cm, we got 22 parts here and it’s a special kind of kit, because it’s the first…
(As you’ll see soon, that’s 8 cm EACH SIDE) That I designed all by myself. -What year came the idea for a GTR with this kit?
-In 2018. We made a small upgrade here, as we’re adding the Cyberwing… And also, we got the AL-13 rims, so that’s a really nice set. Alright, besides that, your GTR rode the air. Ours is gonna stand on standard springs, to keep it driving like the standard GTR’s. So besides it having a body kit, breathing flames and being the first GTR with a Cyberwing… Look, the same as the Liberty Walk Huracan. We got that wing, which in my opinion, is an absolute world-class masterpiece. We’ll be able to program it in a cool way. On top of all that, it’ll also drive. What’s interesting, Łukasz doesn’t require much time, because as we put the GTR here and you got the whole kit ready here… How long do you plan to take on this job? Installing the parts alone will be around 10 days, but finishing up with the electrics and suspension, should be about two weeks. To have it ready to drive. In my opinion, for such a drastic change of installing such a wide kit and all that… That’s an amazing time. I told you about the rims doing an amazing job in case of this car. Truly, the choice wasn’t obvious. -All the AL’s rims coming in…
-Are for you. Fire as f**k. I like that! Alright, let’s agree: Such a rim choice for a GTR… Isn’t one’s daily bread. -Looks cool.
-Looks amazing! The wheel appears to be very futuristic, very innovative. It’s an unobvious choice for a car like that. But, we decided for it, as in the history of this channel, we created dozens of cars… And keep on searching for even more creative and outstanding solutions. That applies to the rims, too, to draw people’s attention and have them wonder: “What even is this?” So, I think this wheel does just that. Here, we got the front rim and it’s already impressive, but look: The rim edge here is about half an iPhone. But, as we move to the back, we got a f**ing pot here. We could do a f**ing Letcho here. Just look, the rear rim’s edge isn’t half an iPhone in size. This is twice as big. Here, it’s an absolute Armageddon. What’s interesting, we could have had the edge even bigger, as the car’s shockingly wide. However, we chose it such way – not sure if you’ll see it through the camera, but the place where the edge ends… The rim curves concavely to the middle, so once we place the phone at the spot where the wheel is bolted… We got space for half of another iPhone, to reach the edge’s top. To show you how the rim fits the car and also by how much the car’s gonna be wider than stock… I think we could lift the GTR up, remove the stock wheel and install this one… It’ll show by how much the rim sticks out, showing how much the kit is gonna widen the body. -You can measure that with an iPad.
-A f**ing MacBook. Also, speaking of interesting facts, to install this kit... Like in case of most body kit, but not all – you got to cut the body up, right? Most importantly, we got to cut and protect the bodywork, to prevent leaks. Let’s lift it up then and install that wheel. To show the people what this all is about. The people – that’s you. You. We’ll show you what this is about. It’s quite alright now. Stanced, slammed, tucked, bagged. All good. An offroad GTR. I got another fun idea, hold on. Hand me the stool. Generally, come closer. Lukas has such rotating stools here. Now watch, what came into my mind. It isn’t that lightweight. It’s a bit heavy, the stool doesn’t want to rotate, but… Hold on, maybe I’ll do it. -Oh, so we’re now testing the driving looks?
-Yes, exactly so. I’ll wheel throw you an ashtray in a moment.
(La Buda Pottery Services) S**t, it’s sticking out a bit. Did we order the right one? Oh f**k! Oh f**k!! Alright, even I didn’t expect this here. Have we ordered it correctly? I don’t know if you ordered it correctly, because there’s no way in hell, that this is 8 cm per side. It’s f**ing 16. No, it’s… Don’t know what to compare it to. Has to be 20 cm. Yeah, yeah. Come on. -Dude…
-This much may hide. It’s gonna be wide. Nah, this is a wheel of the future. Wheel of the future. No, it’s as wide as my head. Han’s wondering if it was ordered correctly. A head each side. It’s gonna be like Huracan – left wheel touches the line and look for the right one, not to scratch on the curb. Gonna be the same thing here. Fire. Better and better stuff’s being uploaded for you, let me tell you, honestly.  Let’s start it up, because interestingly, it’s way louder than the Fame GTR. It’s got different exhaust valves and is much louder on low RPM’s. Sounds great, gotta tell you, it really sounds great. Alright, it’s cold so we won’t mistreat it. But it’s the same thing again, the interior of the GTR. We discussed it all before, when we did the Fame GTR. The center console, showing all these parameters. A fun fact is, that this exact GTR has been owned by us for 3 or 4 months, as of today. Just, everything we do on the channel – uploading videos for you, the trips, recordings, some events… Also, there’s a kind of queue of cars, which I wish to show you in certain order. Re-do them, build them and so on. The queue formed in such way, we’re only getting to this car after 3 or even 4 months now… Ever since we bought it. Alright, let’s not prolong. We got the whole introduction behind us, you got to know the project’s base. You got to know Łukasz, you got to know the whole body kit, that we’ll install. Now, it’d be cool to do something with all that. Leave a like, subscribe to the channel if you don’t already. I don’t speak redundantly, time to work abundantly. Upon installing the tire on the wheel, wheel on the car, and installing suspension to lower the car down… It appears, that it’s gonna be so much wider, that I can stand here. But, without unnecessary prolonging, my loves – a few days have passed. We’re free to get to cutting the fenders, bumpers, installing everything that’s coming to this GTR. However, the rear diffuser is huge. I can count on the boys – which side do I stand on? -This or that?
-This one. I’m the… How was he called, from Toy Story? Buzz Astral. What did he say, what were his lines? To Infinity, and Beyond! Or something like that, right? -Does it show how big this is?
-It does. Can’t talk now, we’re doing important stuff. I’ll call you back in a moment… We are… We’re cutting the fenders. Does it work? To Infinity, and Beyond! Or something! To Infinity, and Beyond! Watch out, you’ll hit something, wait! Hold on, I won’t hit anything. Yeah, sure. Watch it! F**k, if you fall down, I don’t know what our excuse is gonna be. “Why men live shorter than women” The door’s f**ing closing! I came in flying. Hold on, my phone’s ringing now. Krystian, I can’t talk now, doing important recordings. -We’re on a mission, yeah.
-Get it done, see ya. What will the neighbors say to that! From that side. These mosquitos are getting bigger. Alright, let’s get to serious work, because… Finally. It even flies! Alright, let’s remove it and get to serious work. If it isn’t flying with compressed air and removing panties… Those who didn’t see, let me remind you: If not that, I turn into Buzz Astral and run around the garage with a diffuser on my back. Got to have some fun around these cars, right? Yes or not? Yes. I hit something, gentlemen. We got it! What is it, the fuel tank? No, probably some screw from the inside. Do I cut through it? What, the blade? This won’t be an A, but you’re getting a B+. I got a B+ from Han! With a signature! Each time, I do better. Alright, seriously now – the first fender was cut, but this wasn’t our first cut off fender, from the cars, which usually aren’t cut. (LBWK Huracan build video) Throughout the channel’s history, we cut a few such parts. But, it’s the first time for a Nissan GTR. This is the memorable part, the first one to fall off the car. -Is this gonna stick out so much?
-No, hold on. F**k, I was scared it’d be sticking out so much. All four fenders were cut. Basically, we’ll be fitting the kit in a moment. Currently, the diffuser. It is really huge. However, I think you know that best from what we showed you. Makes an impression, it’s massive, really massive, huge. Heard that so many times. Now, I can say that with full conviction, too. Quite a diffuser. This is gonna be a completely different machine, now. Once we add the Cyberwing here… It’s over 210 cm of width, that’s wide. We only got a single semi-trailer that takes cars of such width. If we wish to bring both, we’ll have to do two trips. Or drive it. Or re-do the long one. Already, you got such an early view of what the car’s gonna look like, when ready. However, another fun thing… I move around this way, here. This look is also cool, just so you know – there’s lots of tape here, this isn’t fitted in any way, yet. The body kit isn’t even painted yet, just black, so it disappears a bit. The other nice view, moving so fast… I hit the wall. Sorry. This view here, look how it shows the perfect fit of the tire to the body kit. Notice, how nice the cars looks from this perspective. It looks like some GT3. Like a track-made Nissan. Nice, how we already got the large exhaust tips from MG. A bigger wing for sure, this one disappears completely. And that rim – matches the car like no other! A very unusual choice for this car, I said it already, but I’m 100% satisfied. It looks great and will look even better, once we add the huge, white, sporty letterings here. And the tire will sort of disconnect from the rim. So, that’s fire. I’m super delighted. And the car’s face! Once we take a look with this add-on… Looks aggressively, forget about the final condition, when it’s in correct color, and so on. And so on. Half a year ago, I bought a 2000 HP GTR.
We’ll take delivery of it, now.
(We’re going to the USA) Are we really going to move from a small garage between Cracow and Zakopane, to Los Angeles in the USA? Am I really seated at the airport, waiting for a plane to California, because half a year ago, I bought a 2000 HP GTR? And during the whole season, we had no time to import it to Poland… Due to constantly recording content and doing lots of side projects, 7 days each week? -Yo, what’s going on? Thinking much?
-Dude, I was lost in thoughts. I had these… Didn’t know what was going on for a moment. I likely fell asleep, right? -But the USA. That GTR’s been waiting there for… When did we go to USA?
-Half a year ago. Half a year ago, in March. Seriously, now. The video now, we’re really going to the USA, California, just to record half of a video. With the GTR, we got to pick it up, put into a container and send to Poland. We got to have a 2000 HP GTR in Poland, right? That GTR, it’s from Illinois, Chicago. It’s currently being transported to California on a trailer. To record it under sunlight, for you. I’m still sleepy, you know? But, we’ll get back to the other GTR, between Cracow and Zakopane. We’ll have two GTR’s today. This is f**ked up, way too f**ked up. We’re doing just that, on this channel. Dude, this is the third location. The dude you see now, might be familiar to you – we share the name, we visited him during our last stay in the USA. He had that 2000 HP GTR, and so on, and so on. You probably remember. -So, they just stop in the middle and block the highway?
-Yes, they close it down. -And the people take the exit?
-No, they stop behind. -How long do they block it for?
-As much as they want. -And the police does nothing about it?
-Right! You got it all f**ked up in here! The jam was terrible. The traffic here, this f**ing Burgerland of yours lacks organization! We covered 800 meters in like 40 minutes. (???) Yeah, yeah. F**ing look! -One, two!
-And that’s it. Just get mine in, f**k the rest! Quiet, quiet. Give it, we’ll fit it in. There’s a big one there, too. We’ll fit the big one between the rear seats, don’t give me that s**t. It’s in. All the lenses f**ed up. Worry not, look! The big one will fit, too. -This won’t close.
-What won’t close? Here. -Somebody will sit on one.
-One won’t, come on. Where are you going, I’m the one driving! -Okay, but I got to back it out!
-Why you? We took one driver, to cut costs. We’ll throw it in the back. I did some math, the fact that we flew here, is one thing. Here, here. Here, friendo. Yeah, now drive your tank here. 3218 km – they did this much, one-way. -That’s f**ing extra size!
-How else could it be? You drove all the way from f**ing Chicago! We’ll park here. You gotta stand by the curb, this is the middle of the street, dude. Hello, friend! Do we leave it this way? No… Tiny. A bit “tainy”. A bit “tainy”, a bit of a dialect. Yo, what the f**k is this? 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9... A f**ing 10 meter long trailer! And it’s plugged in, with 3 axles, too. What is this invention. They drove 3200 km for us to enjoy the sun of California. So, do we park it aside, to unload it? Doing it in the middle is a bit whack, isn’t it? Nah, in the middle. “We’re California”. -Can we?
-We can, everywhere. “We’re so”. -You sure?
-Yes, for sure. -So, we unload it in the middle?
-Yeah, why not. “Whay not”? So, turn that 6.6 liter off… And we’ll “unloud”. Let’s put it a bit aside, the guy who we’re renting the house from, will inform us of a complaint in a moment… That the truck can’t pass. The thing I said in the Lambo video! -What was it? I had my knee at the mirror’s level!
-Yes, yes, the knee. Were it to hit me on the crosswalk, the mirror would hit my knee. And in the USA, we saw cars, which would hit my head with their mirrors. Here, my head’s on the mirror’s level. Now, completely seriously. I mean, it’s all completely serious. It’s a bit abstract and even I’m totally shocked. But, they really covered 3200 km and truly, there’s a GTR inside. Truly, we’re then bringing it to Poland. And truly, the GTR was bought long ago. But, I’ll rewind you that story in a moment, so you can understand the Inception of it all. Now, that’s Perfetto. Come, Pete. We’ll f**ing open. Kamil said, you guys had an adventure regarding the fuel. He didn’t want to say it, stating it’d be better, if you tell it. So, we were in New Mexico. And the cold driver drove the truck. When I fell asleep… -Hold on, so you moved to the passenger seat, and he was driving?
-He drove. And you fell asleep. When I woke up, because we went off-road and stuff… I’m like: Where are we, you know? He looked at GPS and said: “Oh, we got no fuel left.” We had 30 miles of range, and the place we had to reach was 34 miles away. Let’s do it, I’m f**ing done. I heard some “uh-oh”. The guys are professionals. They’re looking for a key. We’ll find out, that the car passed so many kilometers, with the key waiting in Chicago. Peacefully chilling. Now, just to interlude for a moment, as we’re gonna unload the GTR in a moment, we’re here at Halloween season in the USA. The house is nicely decorated, there’s a spider, spiderweb, graves… Smells like someone empties their septic tank. That’s right, it’s got a parachute! Damn, it’s nice! Nice, nice! Haven’t seen it in a long time. It’ll look great on Polish roads. Let’s unstrap and f**ing unload it. All the neighbors of this quiet suburb of California, just found out… It’s not gonna be a peaceful week. -How do I enter it, through the window?
-Yeah. F**k. Basically, the magic that accompanies this channel’s making for years, starts now. And for all these years, I can’t logically explain it. I’ll explain what I mean, in a second. Let’s take it out of the trailer and see if it works. Right, suddenly everyone’s riding bikes, paused their work, dude’s walking his dog for the third time… The lady just happens to leave her house. We’re not the locals’ favorites anymore. Got to take it out somewhere. This takes up two properties’ space. What, is it loud? The neighbor was already leaving the… You know, she never saw such one before, just wanted to see. Sure it’s not anything else. You can tell it’s a bit re-fined. With good manners, though. Alright, dude. These bumpers are f**ing out for the post-lift ones. These are f**ing terrible. Why does it have ceramics? A GTR with ceramics… No, it’s cool, but you rarely see that, you know? Yo, wanna play Rock, Paper & Scissors for who stands at the back, while the other starts it up? No, no, no. My balls are f**ing important. There’s many examples of the magic present on the channel, which I mentioned. For example, many of you probably remember, how during our recordings in Hungary, suddenly and out of nowhere… A guy came up and said: “Come with me!” And took us to his spot for drift learning. Hold onto your chairs now, because the magic struck hard. Upon parking on the driveway, suddenly, the landlord messaged us: “Do your friends need the C16 fuel? I own race cars, too.” A bit of confusion, a bit of laugh. Basically, the E85 fuel which powers the GTR, is available at the American gas stations. So, we replied saying, we don’t need it. The dude says, he’d like to come and see it, because he’s a fan. We replied saying: Sure, what’s your ETA? He comes, we talk. The brainwashing starts now. Three weeks ago, I saw this TikTok – many of you probably saw it, too. Because it’s got 10 million views. It went viral. But, the basic question: Does this driveway look familiar? That’s right. Completely randomly, we chose this exact house out of thousands available. Just the one, that went viral on TikTok. We wouldn’t even realize, if the owner weren’t an enthusiast. Inside the garage, which is now an arcade room, he put a dragster together. All alone. A dragster based on the Camaro SS. He’s showing us photos, videos, scrolling through street races in California… Suddenly, he offers us to go with him, so he’ll show us his project. No need to persuade us, that’s absurd. But, we got to know him 3 minutes ago and we’re getting inside of his car. Grażyna, you asked me about what we’re recording today. We sat on the driveway and the video’s recording itself. Basically, the dude’s got 3500 HP here. He says that the blower is the same size as mine. And I’m f**ing shocked. I already know what that’s gonna be like. Much quieter! 25% of loudness, compared to the one in Poland. (Video on the Big Block from USA) The hand fits easily. Much stuff would fit there, after all. Look at these. -What, he says it does a quarter in 6.6 seconds?
-Yeah. -6.6 seconds is fast as f**k, isn’t it?
-Well, hard not to pull 6’s with 3000 HP. But, the regulations state, that if he were to race it… He needs two parachutes and the wheelie bar. Surely a wheelie bar and on the inside… He’s got an attitude from Golkowice, sort of. It’s a street car, he never did quarter mile races in it. That’s how we do it in Golkowice. Going to the mountains We begin the next day quite early, at around 8:00 AM we leave to a car wash, as the car’s super dusty. The car wash remembers the 60’s, more or less. But that applies to most of infrastructure in the USA, that’s what gives it such a vibe. The boss is cleaning the GTR in the back, while I will tell you, I never had such a jet-lag like this one. 9 hours backwards in Los Angeles. When I went to bed at 6:00 PM, yesterday… To catch some sleep before further, night recordings at 10:00 PM… I slept until today, 6:00 AM. A total of 12 hours. I didn’t wake up for the night shots, so I’m hopeful to get them done today. Let me tell you, regarding the recent pace of recordings, special episodes… Regarding the lottery currently happening for you. To have it buttoned down and maintain high standards. The pace is well capable of ruining and wasting me down. But, great things and great videos result from that. You, my viewers, are somewhat satisfied with that, I think. And somehow appreciate it, somewhere. So, we keep on going. That was a short, informative morning, as it’s currently 8:30 AM here. The neighbors were delighted, when we started it up at 8:15 AM. Truly delighted. The next stop is 6 miles further. The gas station with ethanol – E85. -They’re on the left.
-Where? There, behind the M3. We pass them and it perfectly shows the attitude of American police. You got a parachute in the back? The car screams like crazy? But, you don’t mess around and drive calmly? Keep driving, then. I love that approach, it’s just chill. Good thing they didn’t stop us, because the license plates we got behind the parachute… Are from another car. Such a side note. F**ing hell! You didn’t even kick it down! I know, but that’s f**ing crazy! This car’s really f**ing fast! Runs fast as f**k! -Why didn’t it shift?
-It turned the service mode on. -Not sure, if we should recalibrate the sensors.
-Of what? Clutch pressure? -Doesn’t want to shift.
-Yeah it doesn’t. Stop by the side, I wanna see it. -Meaning, you wanna drive?
-Yes, I want to drive it. -Come on, then.
-Now? Yeah. I couldn’t shift. What, is it broken again or needs recalibration? Needs calibration. Like you heard in short, we need to calibrate the clutch oil pressure sensors, in the gearbox. These sensors were replaced a moment before our arrival, as they started misbehaving a bit. So, recalibration didn’t load up, has to be done now. We hope it can be done remotely and that Kamil has a suitable cable to connect to the car’s ECU. Anyway, for today we planned going to Joshua Tree, 2 hours from Los Angeles. To record something really beautiful and the car in amazing surrounding. So, we’ll risk and drive there, to try recalibrate there, because we need space to really kick the car down… To calibrate it at high clutch pressure. Can’t really be done here, as it’s the morning and traffic in LA and around, is basically everywhere. It’s alright, friend. Why doesn’t it work? It’s broken again. Motorsport – expensive and no warranty. -Where are we, honey-bunny?
-On a desert. -But, is this some town or something?
-No, a desert. This is a f**ing desert? I see it’s some sort of town. -Does it have a name?
-Hold on, let’s check. You got to check it yourself! So, the town’s called a palm on the desert. Or a desert of palms. But, it’s very nice around here. Tell you honestly, this is one of the more charming and American-vibey places, I ever visited. It’s definitely prettier here, than in Beverly Hills. Anyway, what you see in the B-rolls now, is a really beautiful, American vibe to live in. I could live here, easily. I’d likely get bored to death and the people would likely disown me, due to the loud exhausts. But, I like it. Yet, the town is just a stop on our way… Because a lawyer, Kamil’s friend – John -  wishes to go with us. So, we stopped by to pick him up and brought the GTR to the place. We’re in Banning, around 1.5 hours away from Los Angeles. In a moment, we’ll be headed there. These mountains and behind them, there’s a town called Pinewood. There, I’ll be able to show you the GTR in beautiful scenery, and not just that. Here in the USA, we got the sound recorder, which will show you many fun things about the GTR. It makes really interesting noises, it’s very loud. It’s got no exhausts, the downpipes aim straight at the ground, right from the turbo’s… As befits the GTR, it sounds quite brutal, with lots of mechanical sounds, like the gearbox. In a moment, we’ll check if the clutch sensors work. We’ll calibrate them. Here, I went on about what we’ll do, but a malfunction awaits us. Didn’t know that when we recorded, but I do now. So, allow me to shorten the talk and get to the point. John the Attorney never sat inside a 1000 HP car, so what did we do? We sat him inside a 2000 HP one. Time to keep going. The plan is simple. Beautiful, mountain roads. Breathtaking drone shots… The combination of an iconic car and amazing views… Simply a dream. Until after half a day of f**ing hauling it here, the most idiotic bulls**t, that immobilizes the car, broke down. Nothing serious, we could fix it right away. But we don’t have a belt. Simple as f**k. You got some bad, f**ing luck with the cars. I never ripped the V-belt. Just a good driver… -The f**k did he say?
-He was happy. F**k me, this is such a bad luck of this car. Half a year ago, the f**ing unbreakable axle broke down. A front one! Now, the previously unbroken V-belt snapped, when I didn’t even f**ing push it, just drove culturally… Recording the content, nice views and everything. What are you doing to these cars, in America? Here’s the thing: Nothing. It just stopped. That’s what happens when you ask for 2000 HP. I don’t want 2000 HP, this thing goes like having 800. I got such one, that’s 800 HP and is quicker. Well, fast it is, when it drives. But it currently doesn’t. At the moment, even a lawnmower is faster. Don’t tell me, we need a semi-trailer for it, now. What else can we do? Won’t start. It’ll be ready for tomorrow morning. Also, the dude from R8 needs to get his ass kicked. Now, a shopping cart could smoke us. Right now, I’d smoke it walking. Not going there. Let me tell you, I prefer drones. Well, once they fall, you got to walk, too. But that’s a rarity. -It flew out nicely, though.
-Yeah. -With such little space to gain speed, amazing.
-The fact it made it, at all! Landed! On the wheels, just like that. -Yo, it did nicely just now.
-It was higher than you! -Did it show?
-Yes. The USA always leads to the same thing. (An hour later) You even broke the RC car. You broke the GTR, broke the RC car… -They sold you a lemon.
-Not just them. Then, he says the car broke down by itself. We carried it all the way back to LA and changed the V-belt. The procedure isn’t very complex, we initially call it a success. A test drive with our friend, straight from Dominican Republic. But, as they say in the USA: It is, what it is. Which means… Just that. -Did something break?
-No, nothing. -What is our friend doing, then?
-Don’t know, playing with the V-belt. With a second one, now! -Isn’t it loose on the power steering pump?
-No, it’s supposed to do that. No, that’s factory condition. -They release it this way.
-Oh, alright. Even if we stayed until midnight here, another V-belt’s gonna f**ing break. Belt after belt. A belt per day is alright. -We’ll refuel and change the V-belt, each time.
-Yeah. That’s right. F**ing alright! Auto Zone’s open until 11 PM. Off we go to pick up the next V-belt. We’re not giving up today, the R8’s getting its ass kicked! Heard that? Don’t f**ing laugh. -Friend, the R8 is still getting its ass kicked today.
-Right… I’ll sit here and eat this cereal. I bet something’s gonna break, when you’re back. Don’t open the parachute. Doesn’t matter if something breaks down or not. -Taking two more V-belts with me today and I’m out to kick R8’s ass.
-Yeah? Bet $1000? $1000. Hold on, I’ll call the shop and ask if they got these belts. -Hello?
-Hello. F**ing hello? Bet $1000? Sure, $1000. In a moment, we’ll have a change to proportions – two belts per each refuel. We’re out to buy a new belt. -I feel like the R8’s gonna kick your ass.
-Worry not. Look at that, that Auto Zone’s open until midnight! They got 8 f**ing belts! They’re sure to last until tomorrow. I’m out to buy a belt. Peter! We’re getting a belt. Midnight. Replacing another belt. We’ll make it. Move it, the GTR’s warmed up. -Got the Insta 360, Czaja?
-Yeah, already mounted. F**ing hell, to drag me over during the night, just for me to witness you getting your ass kicked by an Audi… Dude, you started it up like 20 minutes ago. The whole house’s shaking, I thought the chandelier’s gonna fall on my head. So, this is the GTR’s killer. Have a good look, to recognize its back. I see all well. I’m wearing slides, no f**ks given. You’re wearing slides, because you forgot to bring other shoes. Let’s go. Just bring the R8 out first, as the whole house’s shaking. Attempt no. 1
(Failed) -He bribed him!
-No f**ing idea what happened, the guy didn’t go. We got no walkie-talkies, won’t find out what’s up. There he is. Attempt no. 2 First of all, that was fast. Second, it appeared like the GTR was at the front. However you put it, I’ll never lose here. If I lost $1000, then my GTR is faster than a 1500 HP twin-turbo Audi R8. But, if the R8 was faster, then I won $1000. -F**ing cool. Pretty fast, right?
-Yeah, I couldn’t turn the camera on time! And I was ready for it to be fast. Nice. F**ing hell!! I need my twin-turbo Liberty Walk Huracan to shoot such flames! Interestingly, such rolling races in LA, done during the night, have a silent approval of the police. Two cars are headed towards the highway. One of them with a parachute – that’s normal – and drag tires. The police knows all well, why they’re going there, because it’s daily bread here. But, if the roads are empty – they don’t care. I like it. The plan consisted of bringing the camera inside and tell you about the car… But trust me, dear viewer – it’d sound like I was speaking inside a freight train. GTR is now basically a legend. Ever since 2009, it’s a base for experimental rebuilds in thousands of different styles. You likely noticed, that this video is about two R35’s for a reason. That’s a perfect example, of how versatile this base has since become. In that time in Poland, the body kit parts are being painted. Lots of carbon, pretty fittings and mostly visual changes. In the USA, we’re recording a variant indifferent to unique rims, beautiful paintjob or the body kit… Instead, has a gearbox fully made on CNC, that withstands over 2000 Nm of torque. Different approaches, but the same hobby – motorsport. We already established, that the Godzilla is fast. If even the middle tune and no nitrous is enough to smoke a 1500 HP R8, there’s no doubt. We prepared a nice opportunity for you, to experience that car’s interior. I hope you’ll enjoy it and would like to quickly mention, that we’re able to deliver you such quality content, here on the channel… Thanks to how involved community we create, together. For example, how many e-books you’re buying, during this last event. This is a kind of mutual respect, because you take part in our actions… And thanks to that, we’re able to deliver the highest quality content to you, the motorsport enthusiasts. So, if you like it, stop by 7AUT.PL and get yourself a dope e-book, showing the backstage of creating the channel. In the same time, you got the biggest chances ever, to win one of the 7 cars, from my event… Or 30 side prizes. That’s a kind of product placement. If you wish to, stop by, you’re invited. First place takes the M3 plus the A45s AMG. We, however, move to the video’s highlight. Let’s begin gently, standing still. That’s revving under the supermarket. Alright, #2 please. A standing start. That’s f**ked up! #3 – we’re going 60 on the highway, then give it full gas. In the end, crème de la crème. You may wonder, the task got the best of our microphone. Actually, no. The ALS shoots like 3 machine guns next to each other. That’s indescribable. (Anti-lag) F**k! Thank you for attention, the best is still coming. Don’t repeat such stupid ideas, we do it, so that you don’t have to. Task codename: “Parachute” Two uncles from America promised you a high quality parachute in today’s video. It’s currently 2:17 AM, call it night time. Behind us, probably widely known Golden Gate Bridge. -There were none in California…
-They had no such Golden Gate Bridges in LA, but they do in San Francisco. So we’re here. It’s gonna be legendary. I’m absolutely serious, we came here to Golden Gate, to San Francisco, basically… Just to open the parachute here. That bridge was built in 1937 and I’m not sure if someone passed it with a parachute… But, 3 600 000 cars pass it each year. Yet, only this one does it with a f**ing parachute. Only. Now, I’d like to introduce our stuntman. -Don't (???) speak Polish…
-No, come on! Waiting’s impossible! You screw that! Alright, let’s arm the parachute and do it. If this works out, it’s history, you know? It’ll f**ing work! Do it then, remove! It’ll be ready now! Here you are, Pete. Take it with you, attach it to your head. Come on, it’s cold! It’s 2:30 AM and we’re gonna open the 2000 HP GTR’s parachute on f**ing Golden Gate… Alcatraz is somewhere over there, right? We don’t have a place to stay in San Francisco yet, but this could all change during the next two minutes. A cold and long water trip to Alcatraz. “Inside safe travels!” No suspicions. No suspicions – back then, we laughed about it. But had no idea, it would all change the next moment… And we could face: An entry ban to America, a night in jail or even being deported to Poland. However, allow me to explain you some stuff. Because if I left it like that, it’d be hard to understand. Especially, as they deleted part of our recordings from SD cards. The first key element is that, the bridge’s pedestrian paths are completely closed past 10 PM. We didn’t know that, so we were kind of left loose from the pick-up, on the middle of the bridge, and jumped the fence. Not because both left and right entry gates were closed for pedestrians, we simply wanted to save time, not to have to walk. We didn’t notice, that nobody’s walking on the bridge… Because it was a middle of the night, and the bridge is a few kilometers long… So we thought, if someone wishes to cross it during the night, he’d take an Uber instead of walking for a dozen of minutes… Especially, as it’s very windy on said bridge. Another key thing here is that, at the end of the bridge, there are such exit gates… There, some collision took place, an accident. And a few police cars were there. First of all, it’s huge. Second of all, just over there, just look at zoomed footage – these gates over there. These are such exit gates from the bridge. Kamil called a moment ago… -Kamil…
-There was some accident here, by these gates. -What will he do, then?
-It’ll be hearable as f**k, you’d have to move back to that construction. So, we’re walking between the first and second bridge spans. Just like you heard, there’s been some accident and the police is there. Therefore, we need to move back, so they don’t hear the parachute or the accelerating GTR. What the f**k are we doing? Just how f**ing crazy is this? And how huge this bridge is! -Huge, isn’t it?!
-I can’t cover it in a shot with you! Damn, there’s some “Follow” standing there already, or whatever that is. Some uniformed services. We’re ready. I sent you a location pin. -Before the second one, we’re way before the second one.
-Okay. Alright, let’s maybe move back a bit. So we don’t stand like douchebags here, when the police passes by. -Yo, look. That’s to catch the…
-People. Yeah, people. The “Follow” is backing up, hopefully not to us. Stop, don’t come here, please… Damn. Like I said, we had no idea about not being allowed to walk the bridge. So, we didn’t hide about being there. Quite the opposite, we stood by the fence, didn’t hide behind bars and so on… As it turned out, we couldn’t be there and it turned out, we’ve been spotted. So, the bridge’s maintenance car, that passed us a second ago, passed us due to not seeing us… Received information from the CCTV guy, that he should back up to us, to remind us of not being allowed there. I suppose many of you know, what happened next. The GTR already accelerating at the end of the bridge, can’t be stopped. It’s already speeding up, it’s inevitable. And 15 meters in front of me, there’s a bridge maintenance guy… Telling me, we shouldn’t f**ing be there! And I just hear it coming f**ing closer and closer… -He’s coming!
-Oh f**k! (Przemek and I)        (Bridge security) Did we just shoot a f**ing parachute, while arguing with a guy telling us, about being on a bridge... Yeah! That’s closed on both sides! He asked how we got here, and we jumped the fence after getting out of a f**ing car… And I f**ing pretended, that the flying GTR in the middle never happened!! That didn’t happen. Oh no, the police. We’re f**ked. -Do I replace the card, or what?
-Yeah. Trust me, if two cop cars approach you in the USA… It’s either gonna be a shootout or big trouble. And that was the case here. They told us to head right, but listen closely, as absolute Matrix begins. The cop cars, that turned around to reach us, after getting information from that guy, who we passed with the parachute equipped GTR… They freed up space for Pete to pick up the parachute and load it inside the trunk. Since it’s completely impossible to turn around on that bridge, these cop cars passed Pete, while going at us. Had they stayed there, the car would likely be scrapped! That’s the Californian law for such stunts, like opening a parachute on Golden Gate Bridge! That’s not a f**ing parachute in the middle of nowhere, but Golden Gate Bridge! However, we go where instructed. We also dropped a walkie-talkie in the water, not to be accused of having contact with him, all that time… We knew about being in trouble, so we switched the camera’s SD card. The card with all the parachute content was hidden inside a sock and shoe. However, we quickly shoved in another card, which we filled with a few photos, to show we only went there to take pics. Speaking of trouble, we definitely weren’t wrong – trouble was there, huge trouble. We approach the end of the bridge, six policeman immediately show us to stop… With one hand on a cocked gun. Two of them approach us and immediately order us to place the camera on the ground. Then, immediately start searching us for guns, knives and so on. They run an ID check on me, so I hand them my document and they order me to go to the side. Przemek the Cameraman, however, has neither the ID nor passport on him. To prevent him from escaping, they put his hands behind his back and handcuff him… While reading him information, stating that: Everything he says, will be used against him. Just like from a f**ing movie. I’m already certain of huge trouble, they bring us to that bridge security building. They began interrogating us. Just to let Grażyna know of huge trouble and to have her call the lawyer, I began making up a story about intestines illness… That I need to go to the bathroom. That didn’t work at first, of course. I tried for 5-10 minutes. Lastly, after 10 minutes, one of the guards felt for me and took me to the bathroom. There, I quickly called Grażyna and told her, huge trouble was coming, to have her call the lawyer… That they’ll search us, we’re waiting for a police car, which is to take us away. They kept us like that, my loves, for an hour. They also took our camera, that’s where something really interesting happened. Namely, by deleting all the files from the card, all these fake photos, we supposedly wanted to take… They miss-clicked and began recording themselves, these cops. You’re seeing that now. They asked why there’s no recording of the GTR flying by with the parachute. Because they saw that on CCTV. And then, we said something that saved it all. Because we wanted to record it fly by, we didn’t know he’d open the parachute… And we didn’t record that, because your security guy approached and talked to us. So, how were we supposed to record that? (Like that) And they believed that. They told us to call the GTR guys and tell them to come, that they’ll be arrested. To give them their phone number – we told them, that we met them at a car meetup… That they only talked about doing a quick fly-by, but nothing about the parachute – we’d never agree to that. My loves, after almost an hour of keeping us, they let us go and… I’ll never, ever f**ing forget that day. -Well, such s**t never happened before!
-Dude, I was handcuffed. -Damn.
-F**k, I was certain it’d be: Search, police and jail. Yeah, right. By the way, I think the recording of me dropping the walkie-talkie was there. He watched all the files from yesterday. But, I showed him that the date doesn’t match and he wouldn’t check these. Because he began scrolling past that and the R8 races were there. So, as we threw the walkie-talkie, he saw that? He saw that and paused to see what we dropped out, if it wasn’t “the stuff” or something. Damn, dude! He approached me, and did it like: “Okay, guys!” -He took me like that…
-I know! -He didn’t handcuff me only because I handed him the ID.
-Yeah, I didn’t even have my ID with me. Damn… There it f**ing is. A fun fact – the next day, we swam under the bridge to see it during daylight. The f**er’s so huge and commands such respect… Had I seen it like that before the “Task codename: Parachute”… I’d likely cancel the plan. That’s that for our adventure in the USA. You may ask: Did we fly there just for a single part of the video? The answer is: F**ing of course! So, what else’s left, other than coming back home? A Polish-American video. Hello, homies! You might have forgotten, but we got this unraveled thing in Poland! Indeed, we flew to the USA to only record half of the video… Indeed, speaking of the white, 2000 HP GTR, the topic could be called exhausted. It’s currently being moved from America to Europe on a ship. But, when we recorded in the USA, the guys worked on this GTR all the time… To have it ready for assembly. Everything regarding the perfect fittings, carbon fiber, even the paintjob – that’s that. The car’s ready for assembly and because we wish to drive it on the beautiful, nightly roads of Cracow tonight… Let’s not prolong. Let’s throw all of that on the car and finish the project in a single video. I forgot to mention, in order to assemble that in one evening – follow me… Hello, welcome, welcome, my respects. This here is just the beginning, they’re there too. The whole army was called in for the task. It’s not usually possible to finish such stuff in a single evening. Łukasz, will we drive it tonight? -In two hours.
-Alright. Cool. This man’s positive attitude appeals to me so much… I've simply practiced it, already. A group of kids sat in freezing cold, so I announced a competition Oh s**t! Follow me. Come on inside, form a row. One, two… I’m offering 50 EUR for describing the thing you see here, in a single sentence. The best sentence wins 50 EUR. Our friend’s got a second to think. -The best car in the world, GTR.
-Good. It’s really cool, I like it very much. -You?
-A very beautiful wonder. -You?
-It’s wonderful.
-Well, that’s… Our contestants likely got stressed and didn’t do their best -None of you succeeded, 25 EUR for you...
-Thank you. -For you, for you… Here, buy yourselves some sweets.
-Thank you very much! No need to thank me. Here, our friend gets 50, as he’s the smallest. None of you did well. Nothing too crazy, let’s keep going. Yo, Łukasz? Didn’t you get a bit f**ing carried away? -No, this is the smaller one.
-Smaller than the one you had? Mine reached up here, but we cut it off, impossible to drive. -It sticks out a f**ing lot!
-You just place your hot dog buns here and warm them up. It now sticks out, like in some GT3… Lemans. -It isn’t big.
-Isn’t f**ing big? No, it’s modest, tiny. I wanted to say, more like draw attention, to something hard to notice with a naked eye. But, all the screws used by Lucas are laser cut. With CRBNRE on them. That’s the company, that’s the brand. -Yes or not?
-Right. -Right?
-Yes. We put it in, screw it in and we’ll have the wing in no time. When we do, it’ll match the diffuser – it’ll be neat – that’s what Łukasz says. I don’t know. Now, it’s a bit like lacking eyebrows, come on. It’s like having huge f**ing moustache and no eyebrows. But it’ll get eyebrows in a moment and be beautiful. We support small, Polish endeavors and companies, to let them pay taxes. But, I’ll show you something interesting – look, there’s the whole electrics, cables. Because the wing’s gonna light up. If the wing is to light up, it needs electricity. If it needs it, then it needs cables. And we’re not gonna drive around with such cables. We’re not gonna guide them through the body either, take a look. This is like, the wing support. That’s how it is mounted to the body. Watch, how Łukasz drilled a hole on the inside. Said hole is like a solution from RC cars, there’s such a sleeve on the inside. We have to guide all the cables through, nicely. They’ll be completely invisible, while delivering power like crazy. Lift it up somehow. Come on… That’s the idea, technology and engineering. Amazing, Polish exertions. They do it well. It’s all done alright. Let me shake your hand again. Just two more cables now, it’ll be tight. Get something for an easier fit. Damian always recommends WD-40. Do we have some WD-40 here? I could f**ing use some, to make it slide in easier. Oh s**t, I won’t enter here. A bit of WD-40 like the boss suggested, needed a little push and we got immediate results. Not one McMeal shall fit here. Can’t deny that. When I was a kid, it’s not that I hadn’t such a TV – I hadn’t such a table in the kitchen! Not only is it carbon fiber, huge and could eat from it… You could sit here… -I heard it’s alright to jump on yours.
-You may try. -Will these mounts really withstand standing on them?
-We’ll see. -So, Łukasz. Do you recommend to begin stress tests with some child?
-I mean, whatever you like. I don’t know. -How much do you weigh?
-Around 80 kg. Around 80 kg?! We’re getting a child, come on. Can you organize some child? Sure. It’s waiting outside, there’s a queue. Then you, then me. If it survives me, it’ll survive everything. Hi, we’re choosing you. Come. You’ll be the best, come, come. We need to do it in order. Worry not. How much do you weigh? I don’t know, 38 kg? Alright, hand me the… Watch it, 3… 2… 1! -How is it?
-Nice! Oh, you madman! Did you see, what you’ve done with your feet? It lit up. Check it out, 40 kg. Now it’s your turn. -Will you place me there, too?
-Not you… We got the ladder for you. Oh s**t! Alright, alright! Don’t swing, don’t swing! I’m… For now, 102 kg, easily. 102 kg?! I thought you weighed less! Oh, man! Damn! F**ing of course! Yo! You did it, man! 102 kg and it lights up! Anyone wants to join? Come here, little one! No, alright, no, no! No, we could fall down. But I feel, like I could hold him, too. You did it, brother! The way it should be! Didn’t expect that. Like I said, we support small, tiny Polish enterprises. We’re not gonna shoot it too much in here, as I promised you, we’d do that in the city. However, you may take a look – that’s f**ing crazy. All I wanted to say. -Lucas, how do you like it?
-It looks like my ex. -Brings back memories?
-That’s right. A piece of history. Nice to hear. I like this car. The only thing, I’m gonna complain about – we need to add a spacer at the front. -Don’t know, whose job was to calculate these wheels’ ET?
-The Americans. I didn’t calculate that. Alright. Anyway, it surely needs another centimeter, to be perfect and si qu'a la font. But, we need to order such a spacer and replace these wheel hub bolts. The car from the back, however – f**ing hell! Not sure if you weren’t carried away, it’s f**ing crazy, man. You could lay down here, sideways. Looks amazing. That’s so aggressive, the look, right?! Show them, amazing! -Damian! What will you say, Han?
-Super fire. -You’re so talkative.
-No, just… But here… What else… What else can be said? You already said it, it’s so amazing, that… The fascinating offense on this video’s logic is that, this is just the half of it all, you know? That, there also was the other GTR with 2000 HP. And now, we’re gonna bring it outside, because why not? Let’s do it here, too. Let’s show you that. Those of you, who watch till the end. -Your wing didn’t light up, right? The Cyberwing wasn’t there, back then?
-Yes. -And had the lower wing?
-Lower and the rims were a bit more straight. These AL’s are cool. F**ing hell, look at that. That’s a millimeter tight fit, right? There’s not a single centimeter on left or right, it’s like the Liberty Walk Huracan, if not wider by a centimeter. I’m super stoked about it. Good evening, I'd like a cheeseburger. I wish you, my lovely viewer… Doesn’t matter if you’re a turbo fan of JDM, Italian cars or maybe American. Or maybe German. To have your dream car - Just like I got my dream car of the childhood, the Nissan GTR… To drive it to McDonald’s, turn your Cyberwing on… And place your order on the huge wing. Then eat it. It isn’t all that impossible. The video slowly comes to an end… And I, my dear, lovely viewer… Invite you to 7AUT.PL – it’s such a simple website. You buy an e-book, which by the way, is an amazing thing. You greatly support the channel and also, you can win a car. Now, listen to this. It’s not even about the 7 cars, not about the e-book. It’s not about the possibility to win. This GTR didn’t cost as much as it might seem – despite what you think. Such a GTR as a base for a project, can be had for 64… Call it 80 or 91 thousand EUR for a post-lift version. Of course, that isn’t cheap. The body kit, wheels… Let’s include the exhaust, ECU tuning, maybe something from the interior. Let’s even count that as 23 000 EUR. Allow me to remind you, that the main prize at 7AUT is the M3 and the A45s AMG. Together, well over 230 000 EUR. Second place – the RS6. Don’t want it? You may sell it. You could buy a flat for that. You can build such a GTR and buy a flat. Even the new Toyota Supra, which, let me remind you – will be drawn during the first five minutes of the livestream. I invite you homies very much and hope, I brought you real quality content today. Truly, we recorded this for many months… While we did f**ing crazy stuff in the USA, the car was being assembled here, so I could present you two GTR’s in a single video. Wish you all the best, logging off and thank you all, for participating in our event this much. It’s dope! This is the last event in our history, so I invite you very much. Now simply, to put it in one word, shortly… Two words, actually. Thank you. Have a good one, logging off and good luck to each of you, individually. -Do you like it?
-A lot! -Nice as f**k?
-Yeah! -You playing for any of the cars?
-Actually, no.
-You should! -Do you, gentlemen?
-We do! -Do you?
-We do. -Now…
-Hi! There’s such a GTR, take a look. Let’s assume, you win the M3 and A45. You sell one of the two and build one like this. Let me tell you, your voice is kind of convincing. I don’t think it’s my voice, think it’s him! -Dope, isn’t it?
-Great! -How much out of 10? Without a 7.
-F**ing 100. Dude. -So, the 7 wasn’t needed.
-Wasn’t needed. The scale was too small. So, would you prefer this one or the new A45s? -This one.
-This one, right?
-Sure. -Now, the Touring M3 or this one?
-You know, this one. Oh you! My blood! Can we have that photo? Yeah, sure. A memorial photo and we’re f**ing off. The homegirl will do it for us. Come on, then. I’ll stand in the middle and you come here. -Wish you all the best!
-Same to you! Keep tight. Smile!|||Why did you decide to come here to Poland to see and visit Katowice? What was the reason? Yes, for us, apart from volleyball, it was of course a great opportunity to come to Poland and see different cities. So far we've had a really great tour, we've seen old parts of the city and completely new ones. We learned about the culture and, of course, we had a taste of good Polish food. Exactly. What will remain in your memory from this country?  Well, the memories are definitely, of course I hope, a very nice match and a very nice meeting with Polish volleyball. And on the other hand, of course, cultural experiences, as I mentioned, and food. Also what the city looks like and what the spirit of life in Poland is like. Learning about culture. These are truly the memories I want to take with me from here. Referring to the tour here in Poland, in Katowice - is there anything that will remain in your memory forever? Especially housing estates. I like it a lot. I also think the story behind them is very exciting. Would you come to Poland again? Yest, for a more detailed insight. With pleasure, yes. I heard from several people and friends that Poland has a lot to offer in terms of culture. That's why I was even more happy that the volleyball match is taking place here and that we can take this opportunity to see Poland.|||here is your latest Africa news Poland 
has stopped the South African delegation   on their peacekeeping mission to Russia 
and Ukraine the head of South Africa's   presidential security service Major General 
Wally Rood accused Poland of racism and for   taking actions that threatened the life of the 
president of South Africa they are delaying us on Jeopardy because he could have 
been in Kiev this afternoon already   and this is what they are doing and I 
want you guys to see this our races there   when we started to open the packages like they 
wanted to rush right to confiscate our fire   that's why we had to put it back journalists 
who traveled to Poland on route to Ukraine are   stuck at warsaw's airport with President Cyril 
ramaphosa's protection unit journalist Amanda   Cosa from the Sunday Times also had this to say 
about what was happening on the ground my name is from the Sunday Times and I'm coming live to 
you from Poland airport with the head of the   presidential Protection Services Major General has 
told us as the media that the Polish government   has sabotaged deliberately sabotaged the South 
African government since we arrived here during   the day we haven't been able to get off the flight 
we've been told that we do have all the correct   paperwork for this trip however we haven't been 
able to get out of the site we've been sitting in   for about nine hours police and Midstream has 
told us that they've confiscated the Weaponry as   we know the president is on the peace initiative 
with other heads of state negotiations between   the South African and polish police had lasted 
well over 22 hours according to a South African   journalist during an impromptu media briefing 
Poland a member of NATO a military alliance   between 31 member states has been critical 
of Russia's invasion of its neighbor Ukraine   South Africa has maintained a non-aligned 
stance on the war annoying the USA here   is what the president's spokesperson had to say 
about the current situation this is Vincent the   president's spokesperson this is just a note to 
say the president arrived in Kiev safely by train   along with other heads of states and government 
who are part of the African latest peace mission   to Ukraine and Russia I would like to assure all 
South Africans that there has been no compromise   whatsoever to the president's safety as 
a result of the impasse that involved the   chatter flight [Music] presidential Protection 
Services team and the media we acknowledge the   regrettable nature of that incident our officials 
are engaging with their polish counterparts to   resolve the impasse so that the PPS team as well 
as the media can proceed toward their Journey as   planned as well as be able to cover at least 
the Russian lag of the peace talks as well as   of of the trip we deeply deeply disturbed 
by the experience they've gone through and   we are engaging our polish counterparts to see 
to which that situation is resolved thank you these difficulties forced the president 
to arrive in Ukraine by Rail ramaphosa and   his peace delegation are set to travel to Saint 
Petersburg later and meet President Vladimir Putin let us know in the comments below 
if you found this video informative   please show your support by liking and 
sharing this video for the YouTube algorithm   don't forget to subscribe and hit the notification 
Bell to receive updates on our latest videos   and always remember Africa is watching|||  Hi how are things? Welcome to a new video on my channel I'm Xavi Luque if you like the content of the channel, don't forget to subscribe at the bottom where the description or the button that I will leave you above I will continue reacting to the videos that were seen in Eurovision TV 2022 I'm going with Poland 🇵🇱. I have had the channel a little quite forgotten. But it's just that I'm running out of time And now with 3 days of celebration for Sant Joan I've had a while. Let's go with Ochman, River and Poland! The effects! That obviously Being live I couldn't see them What a voice Ochman has! Wow the falsetto! It has some bass and treble ... spectacular! And how handsome he is! What eyes he has The proposal is very good But it is true that the dancers are a bit misleading And the cameraman who is not quite as good as he should be For a show like this. The plans could be much better What it said. This part is very chaotic With the dancers You pay more attention to them than to Ochman But what a voice!!! Wow Well spectacular Ochman's voice. For me one of the best male soloists of 2022 One of the best positions achieved by Poland And it could have been better For my taste! But this is the level that Poland should take. As I was talking to a Polish friend of mine, Lukas. In the Junior they have some impressive singers I don't know if you have seen Sara James in the Junior last year She has won the gold button in America's Got Talent By Simon Cowell .. Brutal! Brutal that woman, well that woman. That girl! Because I think she is 13 years old . I hope to see her from Junior to Senior in a few years . Because she is impressive . So far the reaction to Poland. We will continue in the next video. If you liked it, give it a LIKE AND SUBSCRIBE|||Hello, Warsaw! (Applause.) Witaj, Polsko!
(Applause.) Mr. President; Mr. Prime Minister; Madam Mayor;
heads of state and government, past and present -- including the man who jumped that shipyard
wall to lead a strike that became a movement, the prisoner turned president who transformed
this nation -- thank you, Lech Walesa, for your outstanding leadership. (Applause.) Distinguished guests, people of Poland, thank
you for your extraordinary welcome and for the privilege of joining you here today. I
bring with me the greetings and friendship of the American people -- and of my hometown
of Chicago, home to so many proud Polish Americans. (Applause.) In Chicago, we think of ourselves
as a little piece of Poland. In some neighborhoods, you only hear Polish. The faithful come together
at churches like Saint Stanislaus Kostka. We have a parade for Polish Constitution Day.
And every summer, we celebrate the Taste of Polonia, with our kielbasa and pierogies,
and we're all a little bit Polish for that day. (Applause.) So being here with you, it
feels like home. (Applause.) Twenty-five years ago today, we witnessed
a scene that had once seemed impossible -- an election where, for the first time, the people
of this nation had a choice. The Communist regime thought an election would validate
their rule or weaken the opposition. Instead, Poles turned out in the millions. And when
the votes were counted, it was a landslide victory for freedom. One woman who voted that
day said, "There is a sense that something is beginning to happen in Poland. We feel
the taste of Poland again." She was right. It was the beginning of the end of Communism
-- not just in this country, but across Europe. The images of that year are seared in our
memory. Citizens filling the streets of Budapest and Bucharest. Hungarians and Austrians cutting
the barbed wire border. Protestors joining hands across the Baltics. Czechs and Slovaks
in their Velvet Revolution. East Berliners climbing atop that wall. And we have seen
the extraordinary progress since that time. A united Germany. Nations in Central and Eastern
Europe standing tall as proud democracies. A Europe that is more integrated, more prosperous
and more secure. We must never forget that the spark for so much of this revolutionary
change, this blossoming of hope, was lit by you, the people of Poland. (Applause.) History was made here. The victory of 1989
was not inevitable. It was the culmination of centuries of Polish struggle, at times
in this very square. The generations of Poles who rose up and finally won independence.
The soldiers who resisted invasion, from the east and the west. The Righteous Among the
Nations -- among them Jan Karski -- who risked all to save the innocent from the Holocaust.
The heroes of the Warsaw Ghetto who refused to go without a fight. The Free Poles at Normandy
and the Poles of the Home Army who -- even as this city was reduced to rubble -- waged
a heroic uprising. We remember how, when an Iron Curtain descended,
you never accepted your fate. When a son of Poland ascended to the Chair of Saint Peter,
he returned home, and here, in Warsaw, he inspired a nation with his words -- "there
can be no just Europe without the independence of Poland." (Applause.) And today we give
thanks for the courage of the Catholic Church and the fearless spirit of Saint John Paul
II. (Applause.) We also recall how you prevailed 25 years
ago. In the face of beatings and bullets, you never wavered from the moral force of
nonviolence. Through the darkness of martial law, Poles lit candles in their windows. When
the regime finally agreed to talk, you embraced dialogue. When they held those elections -- even
though not fully free -- you participated. As one Solidarity leader said at the time,
"We decided to accept what was possible." Poland reminds us that sometimes the smallest
steps, however imperfect, can ultimately tear down walls, can ultimately transform the world.
(Applause.) But of course, your victory that June day
was only the beginning. For democracy is more than just elections. True democracy, real
prosperity, lasting security -- these are neither simply given, nor imposed from the
outside. They must be earned and built from within. And in that age-old contest of ideas
-- between freedom and authoritarianism, between liberty and oppression, between solidarity
and intolerance -- Poland's progress shows the enduring strength of the ideals that we
cherish as a free people. Here we see the strength of democracy: Citizens
raising their voices, free from fear. Here we see political parties competing in open
and honest elections. Here we see an independent judiciary working to uphold the rule of law.
Here in Poland we see a vibrant press and a growing civil society that holds leaders
accountable -- because governments exist to lift up their people, not to hold them down.
(Applause.) Here we see the strength of free markets and
the results of hard reforms -- gleaming skyscrapers soaring above the city, and superhighways
across this country, high-tech hubs and living standards that previous generations of Poles
could only imagine. This is the new Poland you have built -- an economic "Miracle on
the Vistula" -- Cud nad Wisłą. (Applause.) Here we see the strength of free nations that
stand united. Across those centuries of struggle, Poland's fate too often was dictated by others.
This land was invaded and conquered, carved up and occupied. But those days are over.
Poland understands as few other nations do that every nation must be free to chart its
own course, to forge its own partnerships, to choose its own allies. (Applause.) This year marks the 15th anniversary of Poland's
membership in NATO. We honor Polish service in the Balkans, in Iraq and Afghanistan. And
as Americans, we are proud to call Poland one of our strongest and closest allies. (Applause.) This is the Poland we celebrate today. The
free and democratic Poland that your forebears and some who are here today dreamed of and
fought for and, in some cases, died for. The growing and secure Poland that you -- particularly
the young people who are here today -- have enjoyed for your entire lives. It's a wonderful story, but the story of this
nation reminds us that freedom is not guaranteed. And history cautions us to never take progress
for granted. On the same day 25 years ago that Poles were voting here, tanks were crushing
peaceful democracy protests in Tiananmen Square on the other side of the world. The blessings
of liberty must be earned and renewed by every generation -- including our own. This is the
work to which we rededicate ourselves today. (Applause.) Our democracies must be defined not by what
or who we're against, but by a politics of inclusion and tolerance that welcomes all
our citizens. Our economies must deliver a broader prosperity that creates more opportunity
-- across Europe and across the world -- especially for young people. Leaders must uphold the
public trust and stand against corruption, not steal from the pockets of their own people.
Our societies must embrace a greater justice that recognizes the inherent dignity of every
human being. And as we've been reminded by Russia's aggression in Ukraine, our free nations
cannot be complacent in pursuit of the vision we share -- a Europe that is whole and free
and at peace. We have to work for that. We have to stand with those who seek freedom.
(Applause.) I know that throughout history, the Polish
people were abandoned by friends when you needed them most. So I've come to Warsaw today
-- on behalf of the United States, on behalf of the NATO Alliance -- to reaffirm our unwavering
commitment to Poland's security. Article 5 is clear -- an attack on one is an attack
on all. And as allies, we have a solemn duty -- a binding treaty obligation -- to defend
your territorial integrity. And we will. We stand together -- now and forever -- for your
freedom is ours. (Applause.) Poland will never stand alone. (Applause.) But not just Poland
-- Estonia will never stand alone. Latvia will never stand alone. Lithuania will never
stand alone. Romania will never stand alone. (Applause.) These are not just words. They're unbreakable
commitments backed by the strongest alliance in the world and the armed forces of the United
States of America -- the most powerful military in history. (Applause.) You see our commitment
today. In NATO aircraft in the skies of the Baltics. In allied ships patrolling the Black
Sea. In the stepped-up exercises where our forces train together. And in our increased
and enduring American presence here on Polish soil. We do these things not to threaten any
nation, but to defend the security and territory of ourselves and our friends. Yesterday, I announced a new initiative to
bolster the security of our NATO allies and increase America's military presence in Europe.
With the support of Congress, this will mean more pre-positioned equipment to respond quickly
in a crisis, and exercises and training to keep our forces ready; additional U.S. forces
-- in the air, and sea, and on land, including here in Poland. And it will mean increased
support to help friends like Ukraine, and Moldova and Georgia provide for their own
defense. (Applause.) Just as the United States is increasing our
commitment, so must others. Every NATO member is protected by our alliance, and every NATO
member must carry its share in our alliance. This is the responsibility we have to each
other. Finally, as free peoples, we join together,
not simply to safeguard our own security but to advance the freedom of others. Today we
affirm the principles for which we stand. We stand together because we believe that
people and nations have the right to determine their own destiny. And that includes the people
of Ukraine. Robbed by a corrupt regime, Ukrainians demanded a government that served them. Beaten
and bloodied, they refused to yield. Threatened and harassed, they lined up to vote; they
elected a new President in a free election -- because a leader's legitimacy can only
come from the consent of the people. Ukrainians have now embarked on the hard road
of reform. I met with President-elect Poroshenko this morning, and I told him that, just as
free nations offered support and assistance to Poland in your transition to democracy,
we stand with Ukrainians now. (Applause.) Ukraine must be free to choose its own future
for itself and by itself. (Applause.) We reject the zero-sum thinking of the past -- a free
and independent Ukraine needs strong ties and growing trade with Europe and Russia and
the United States and the rest of the world. Because the people of Ukraine are reaching
out for the same freedom and opportunities and progress that we celebrate here today
-- and they deserve them, too. We stand together because we believe that
upholding peace and security is the responsibility of every nation. The days of empire and spheres
of influence are over. Bigger nations must not be allowed to bully the small, or impose
their will at the barrel of a gun or with masked men taking over buildings. And the
stroke of a pen can never legitimize the theft of a neighbor's land. So we will not accept
Russia's occupation of Crimea or its violation of Ukraine's sovereignty. (Applause.) Our
free nations will stand united so that further Russian provocations will only mean more isolation
and costs for Russia. (Applause.) Because after investing so much blood and treasure
to bring Europe together, how can we allow the dark tactics of the 20th century to define
this new century? We stand together because we know that the
spirit of Warsaw and Budapest and Prague and Berlin stretches to wherever the longing for
freedom stirs in human hearts, whether in Minsk or Caracas, or Damascus or Pyongyang.
Wherever people are willing to do the hard work of building democracy -- from Tbilisi
to Tunis, from Rangoon to Freetown -- they will have a partner in our nations. For in
the struggles of these citizens we recall our own struggles. In their faces we see our
own. And few see this more clearly than the people of Poland. The Ukrainians of today are the heirs of Solidarity
-- men and women like you who dared to challenge a bankrupt regime. When your peaceful protests
were met with an iron fist, Poles placed flowers in the shipyard gate. Today, Ukrainians honor their fallen with
flowers in Independence Square. We remember the Polish voter who rejoiced to "feel the
taste of Poland again." Her voice echoes in the young protestor in the Maidan who savored
what she called "a taste of real freedom." "I love my country," she said, and we are
standing up for "justice and freedom." And with gratitude for the strong support of the
Polish people, she spoke for many Ukrainians when she said, "Thank you, Poland. We hear
you and we love you." (Applause.) Today we can say the same. Thank you, Poland
-- thank you for your courage. Thank you for reminding the world that no matter how brutal
the crackdown, no matter how long the night, the yearning for liberty and dignity does
not fade away. It will never go away. Thank you, Poland, for your iron will and for showing
that, yes, ordinary citizens can grab the reins of history, and that freedom will prevail
-- because, in the end, tanks and troops are no match for the force of our ideals. Thank you, Poland -- for your triumph -- not
of arms, but of the human spirit, the truth that carries us forward. There is no change
without risk, and no progress without sacrifice, and no freedom without solidarity. (Applause.) Dziękuję, Polsko! God bless Poland. (Applause.)
God bless America. God bless our unbreakable alliance. Thank you very much. (Applause.)|||Teutonic Knights (Poland, 1960) - Grunwald Before these wild bastards decide where to stand our banners will take the most convenient positions. And there... Look, Brothers. There stand the Order's guests! Best knights of all Europe! The rest... is in God's hands. He'll help His loyal servants. The rest is in God's hands. He'll help His loyal servants. My lord! The Teutons are out in the battlefield! To battle, Brothers! It will be bloody but it will ensure the rule of christianity in the East for the next millennium! The Grand Master of the Order! Heil! Heil! Heil! Heil! 🥁🥁🥁 🥁drums beating in the distance🥁 🥁still drums, but now closer🥁 🥁drums beating louder as the knights approach🥁 👑Dear sirs, we go to the Holy Mass. My lord! The Teutons have knights from Bavaria, Swabia and Franconia! Interrupt  Mass! My king! Knights fron Rhineland, Frisia and England! 🎹Sounds of the Holy Mass🎹 They're hiding in the forest. They're better with a spoon than with a gun! You don't know them. It is not the heart that Poles lack. But, as I know, their king... He expects peaceful emissaries to the last minute. Shame! The whole power of the Order fears some wild Poles! I'd rather die than that! Even alone, only with these swords, I could attack the entire Polish army! No, it's against discipline. Advise me how to draw an enemy from the forest? My lord! Emissaries from the Order are coming! Grand Master Ulrich von Jungingen calls Your Highness and Grand Duke Witold for an open battle! And to raise your courage, which you clearly lack, he sends these two swords. 🥁drums beating in the distance🥁 The Grand Master also ordered to tell you that, if you lack space for deploying, we could grant you some more for you not to rot in those bushes. We have enough swords here ... ... but we will also take them as a prophecy of victory. 🐎The sounds of horses.🐎 🎺trumpets playing🎺 Runner! Stop the heavy troops! Not they first! Stop!! STOP!!! By the king's order! Go back! Turn back, by the king's order! Go back! Runner! To Grand Duke Vytautas! Tell him to attack the enemy! LITHUANIA! 🏇Tatar pipes playing🏇 🏇Lithuanian war cries🏇 [bombards shooting] 🏇Lithuanian war cries🏇 🏇horses falling/dying 🏇 Let them burn in Hell... They got through. It's just light cavalry of Vytautas! Begin, in God's name. They won't get through and we'll just trample our archers! BEGIN! May God be with us ... 🎺The sound of Tatar flutes🎺 🏇Tatar pipes and Lithuanian war cries🏇 Our knights! They'll trample us! [screams] 🥁drums playing in the distance🥁 My king! Please, come and help us! Save our men! Liechtenstein! Attack! 🎶Christ is resurrected🎶 🏇horses charging🏇 To attack! 🎶Bogurodzica🎶("The Mother of God") 🎶virgin🎶 🎶God🎶 🎶praised🎶 🎶Mary🎶 🏇horses charging and war cries on both sides🏇 combat sounds 👑Banners of Kalisz and Sieradz, support our right flank! combat sounds 👑Go and help Masovia! [combat sounds] The royal banner is in danger! (And his name is ... Zbyszko from Bogdaniec!) combat sounds Teutonic cry 🎶Christ ist erstanden" ("Christ is resurrected")🎶 👑Take three banners, make a loop through Ludwikowo (or Łodwigowo) and charge! Turn back and follow me! 🏇Horses running🏇 🏇Water splash🏇 Combat sounds. Combat sounds in the distance. We'll make a circle and charge at their side! Combat sounds in the distance. Combat sounds. 👑Infantry hits now! On the enemy! On the enemy! 🏇Combat sounds.🏇 🏇Combat sounds and horses dying.🏇 🏇Combat sounds and horses dying (this battle left one of the biggest horse graveyards in history🏇 🏇Combat sounds and horses dying🏇 🏇Combat sounds🏇 Combat sounds and Urlich panting. Combat sounds and Urlich screaming. Combat sounds. Shouts in the distance. Shouts in the distance (one more dead horse) Kuno Liechtenstein! Do you recognize me? I do. I vowed I'd find you and fight you. Bring it. For death, not for captivity! Bring it! Take off your helmet! Bring it, you dog! Duel sounds. 🥁Drummer dying🥁 Gloomy music. Monks praying. 📯Fanfares.📯 📯This is the one who, by this very morning, thought of himself being superior to all others...📯 🥁Drums🥁 Jagna?! Jagna! Laughs. Jagna is the girl. The End. 😄😉 He writes and translates into several languages: Joachim Moczko|||Welcome to Warsaw, the dynamic and vibrant
capital of Poland! While the city is often associated with its
rich history and resilient spirit, there's so much more to discover beyond its war-related
past. One of the best ways to experience the true
essence of Warsaw is through cycling. Hop on a bicycle and embark on a thrilling
adventure through Warsaw's streets and neighborhoods. As you pedal along, you'll be immersed in
the city's unique blend of old-world charm and modern vibrancy. Glide past beautifully preserved architectural
gems, such as the iconic Royal Castle and the stunning Palace of Culture and Science. Cruise through the picturesque Old Town, a
UNESCO World Heritage Site, with its cobblestone streets and colorful facades. Feel the lively energy of the Nowy Świat
boulevard as you pass by trendy cafes, boutique shops, and street performers. Take a break in one of Warsaw's many lush
parks, like Łazienki Park or the Warsaw Uprising Mound, where you can relax amidst nature's
tranquility. As you pedal along the Vistula River, enjoy
the panoramic views and catch glimpses of the modern skyscrapers that dot the city's
skyline. Stop by the Powiśle district, known for its
vibrant street art and trendy hangouts, and soak up the artistic atmosphere that permeates
the area. If you're in the mood for some cultural exploration,
pedal your way to the Praga district, a former working-class neighborhood that has transformed
into a hub for creativity and artistic expression. Here, you'll find art galleries, alternative
theaters, and cozy cafes where you can take a well-deserved break. Exploring Warsaw by bicycle allows you to
connect with the city on a deeper level. Feel the breeze in your hair as you uncover
hidden corners, stumble upon charming cafes, and soak up the friendly atmosphere. With an extensive network of bike lanes and
rental services available, Warsaw is a cyclist's paradise. So, whether you're a seasoned cyclist or just
looking for a fun and eco-friendly way to explore a city, grab a bike and embark on
a two-wheeled adventure through the captivating streets of Warsaw. Discover the city's vibrant culture, beautiful
parks, and welcoming atmosphere, all while experiencing the joy of cycling in this dynamic
European capital. Are you ready to experience Warsaw from a
unique perspective? Leave the crowded buses and trams behind and
embark on an exciting cycling adventure through the heart of Poland's capital. Warsaw is a city that welcomes cyclists with
open arms, offering a network of well-maintained bike paths and a plethora of sights to explore. Pedal your way through the historic streets
of Warsaw's Old Town, where charming cobblestone lanes wind their way past medieval buildings
and quaint cafes. As you cycle along, you'll be transported
back in time, admiring the beautifully restored architecture that reflects the city's rich
heritage. Escape the urban hustle and bustle and venture
into Warsaw's green oases. Discover the vast expanses of Łazienki Park,
a true gem with its elegant palaces, tranquil lakes, and meandering paths. Take a break from cycling to visit the stunning
Palace on the Water, surrounded by manicured gardens that create a peaceful retreat in
the heart of the city. Continue your journey along the banks of the
Vistula River, where dedicated cycling paths offer breathtaking views of Warsaw's skyline. Marvel at the modern skyscrapers that stand
tall, serving as a testament to the city's growing prosperity and forward-thinking mindset. As you venture further, you'll find yourself
in the vibrant district of Praga. Known for its hipster vibe and bohemian atmosphere,
Praga is home to a thriving arts scene, with numerous galleries, street art, and independent
shops. Explore the vibrant Ząbkowska Street, filled
with lively cafes and quirky bars, where you can stop for a refreshment and soak up the
local culture. For those seeking a taste of Warsaw's modern
side, head to the bustling city center, where innovative architecture blends seamlessly
with historic landmarks. Marvel at the iconic Palace of Culture and
Science, a symbol of the city's resilience and a fantastic spot to capture panoramic
views of Warsaw from its observation deck. Cycling in Warsaw not only allows you to explore
the city at your own pace but also provides a sense of freedom and adventure. You'll discover hidden corners, stumble upon
charming local markets, and witness the daily rhythm of Warsaw's inhabitants as they go
about their lives. So grab a bike, put on your helmet, and embark
on a memorable journey through Warsaw's streets. Feel the wind in your hair as you soak up
the sights and sounds of this vibrant capital, immersing yourself in its culture, history,
and lively atmosphere. Warsaw awaits, ready to be explored on two
wheels! Get ready for an extraordinary adventure as
we take you on a thrilling cycling tour through the hidden gems of Warsaw. Leave the touristy paths behind and discover
the city's lesser-known treasures, all while enjoying the freedom and exhilaration that
comes with cycling. Begin your journey in the hip and trendy neighborhood
of Powiśle. Pedal along its vibrant streets adorned with
stunning street art, and feel the creative energy that flows through its eclectic cafes,
art galleries, and local boutiques. This dynamic district is a hub for artists
and innovators, and you'll find a unique blend of old and new, tradition and modernity. Continue your expedition to the charming Praga
district, a neighborhood bursting with character and authenticity. As you navigate its cobbled streets, you'll
encounter bohemian cafes, hidden courtyards, and secret gardens. Praga's industrial past and artistic present
merge harmoniously, creating an atmosphere that is as captivating as it is captivating. Venture further into the heart of Warsaw's
urban landscape and discover the revitalized areas along the Vistula River. Follow the cycling paths that line the riverbank,
offering spectacular views of the water and the city skyline. Take a moment to appreciate the architectural
wonders that dot the landscape, from the iconic National Stadium to the modernist-inspired
Copernicus Science Centre. For a taste of nature within the city, make
your way to the Wilanów district. Pedal through the majestic Wilanów Palace
Park, a vast green oasis filled with meticulously manicured gardens, serene ponds, and enchanting
pathways. Explore the palace itself, a testament to
Polish history and art, as you immerse yourself in its opulent beauty. As your cycling adventure unfolds, don't forget
to indulge in Warsaw's culinary delights. Take a break at local food markets and sample
traditional Polish treats, from pierogi (dumplings) to zapiekanka (open-faced sandwiches). Warsaw's vibrant food scene is sure to satisfy
any craving and leave you with a taste of the city's gastronomic delights. Whether you're a seasoned cyclist or a casual
rider, exploring Warsaw on a bicycle offers a unique and immersive experience. It allows you to connect with the city on
a more personal level, discovering its hidden stories and vibrant neighborhoods at your
own pace. So grab your bike, put on your helmet, and
embark on an unforgettable journey through Warsaw's secrets. Unveil the city's soul as you pedal through
its lesser-known streets, capturing the essence of this captivating destination. Warsaw awaits, ready to be explored on two
wheels, revealing its hidden treasures one pedal at a time.|||enhanced forward presence efp in the Eastern flank # stronger together with allies NATO is an alliance Bound by shared history values and goals the framework Nation for the NATO battle group in Estonia is the United Kingdom currently it is composed of soldiers from Britain France and Iceland with support from the Danes in the past they have all worked closely with Estonian Partners to defend Estonia Canada was the first country to ratify Latvia's Ascension to Nato in 2004 Canada is leading the multinational deployment in lvia as a framework Nation six nations are sending troops to efp Lithuania led by German forces the efp battle group Poland is led by US forces in 2023 the exercise Griffin shock 23 showcased efp battle group Poland's multinational forces different countries cooperated during a tactical fire drill allied forces are strengthening each country's independent defense capabilities and providing support and maintaining peace # stronger together with [Music] allies|||What's up people! Welcome to Jasmine T TV. I am Jasmine T. I hope everyone had a happy holiday and a very Merry
Christmas. I just wrapped up my Christmas holidays in Poland and I thought it would
be pretty cool to share some interesting facts that I learned about Christmas
traditions here in Poland. Now for those of you who have watched previous videos
and heard me say that I was going home for Christmas, that I was going to South
Carolina and I would not miss another Christmas with my family-- I said that.
I definitely said that. I even bought a plane ticket,  but long story
short, the residency process here in Poland struck again and I had to stay
in Poland  so I will definitely do an update video on that. I think it's important to
give you guys all the details especially for anyone who is considering moving to
Poland. It's really important that you understand what you're getting into with
this residency process okay but we'll get into that another time. We're going
to focus on happy thoughts and new experiences 
and not really dwell on this very depressing subject. Okay, so let's just
jump right on in. I'm going to share five fun facts about Christmas traditions in
Poland. Let's just dive right on in with fun fact number one and that is
Christmas holidays in Poland is basically a three-day event.
The 24th, the 25th, and the 26th. Now, the 24th is the most important out of all
these days even though on the 24th, shops are open and people have to go to work,
but on this day is the Polish Wigilia and that is your traditional
Christmas Eve supper and this year I got to attend my first Polish Wigilia. I
celebrated with my boyfriend's family and I just learned so many things about
Polish traditions that I just had to tell y'all okay. So number two, fun fact
number two. Let's basically break down what a Polish Wigilia even looks like
because it's so different than Christmas dinner with my family.
So first off, the dinner traditionally consists of twelve dishes. I've heard
different reasons for why there may be twelve dishes. The first thing I heard
were that twelve dishes basically represent good luck
for the next twelve months or the twelve dishes could have symbolized Jesus'
twelve disciples. I guess it depends on whose house you go to, it might have
different meanings. Okay, so you have these twelve dishes and out of all these
dishes, there is no meat. So even the pierogi, the dumplings will have like
cabbage and mushrooms. So the only thing that's really served is fish. Usually
you'll find carp or herring at a traditional Polish Wigilia. So you
have these twelve dishes. You have your carp, you have your herring, and also if
you notice this beautiful tablecloth-- if you look under this tablecloth, you will
find hay and this hay is to serve as a reminder that Jesus was born in a manger.
So throughout this supper, there are just so many little things, so many
little symbols. One thing I thought was really cool is that everyone sitting at
the table, but there's an empty place setting. So if you're expecting 14 people
to your Wigilia, then you would actually set a place for 15 and this extra seat
is-- I've heard different meanings for this and I'm pretty sure someone will
correct me in the comments below-- but I heard that the empty place setting
represents a place for the Lord and I also heard that this empty place setting
is for a lost stranger or lost wanderer who needs a meal on this holiday.
We don't do anything like that but where I'm from, all the seats are taken, so I
thought that was pretty cool. So that's basically the set
up of the dinner, but one thing I noticed is that even the pace of the
dinner was different than what I was used to. Each dish wasn't really eaten
together, so for example we didn't have full dinner plates.
It was more like little saucers and so the first course or the first dish was
one dumpling and so everyone ate their dumpling, I mean it was huge. Everyone had
their dumpling, we ate it, and we finished. and then someone brought out pieces of
carp and everyone got one piece of carp. That's how we kind of like progressed
through the 12 dishes just individually which is so different-- so different than back home. For example, when it's time to fix food in my
aunt's house, you get your plate-- a big plate okay, and you are putting on your fried
turkey, your ham, your ribs, your collard greens ,your butter beans, your corn--your cornbread... So you're putting all of that on your plate at the same
time and no one is doing this whole-- one at a time, I'm done.
One at a time, are we done? type of situation. You get a plate, you park it
somewhere, and you just go to town. So this was very different and
that's basically what a Polish Wigilia looks like all right. Fun fact number
three, let's go into something called Pasterka. What in the world is
Pasterka? And this is-- It translates into "Shepherd's Mass", if I'm
not mistaken? But it's basically a mass observed by Roman Catholics so some
people will have their Christmas Eve supper and then they will go to church
at midnight or will be in church at midnight. Others will celebrate Pasterka, but in a different way. Maybe at a bar or a house party with family and
friends but just know that at midnight another type of celebration starts after
the Wigilia. So you have this long dinner that's kind of like building up for the
Pasterka celebration. Fun fact number four and we're actually going to reverse
a bit. I thought this was so intimate and like really bringing people together
and I wish that we kind of did something like this in my family but it is called
the sharing of the opłatek and this happens before you even sit down to have
your supper. An opłatek is basically this thin wafer similar to
what you would use for communion so you go around with your wafer to each person
in the room and you wish them peace and prosperity and you break off a piece of
their wafer, they break off a piece of yours and you eat it and that's
basically it. And you go to the next person, but what I thought
was really cute is it wasn't something just for the adults, even the children
participated so you're like bending down to break the little child's opłatek and you're wishing them well, they're wishing you well so I thought that was-- I
thought that was pretty cute okay and The last fun fact, number five
it wouldn't be Polish Christmas traditions if there wasn't drinking
involved so, for example, if you go to-- if you come to my house in South
Carolina for our Christmas dinner and we ask you what you want to drink? We're
basically going to offer you sweet tea, lemonade, or water. That's what we consume with our Christmas dinner. In Poland-- at
the Polish Wigilia, I was offered brandy or vodka and I'm not a heavy drinker. I
don't really like shots either. I like sweet drinks. I like mixed drinks, but you
had to have some alcohol because the number of times-- the amount of toasts that
go on during this supper is like-- I lost count
okay I pretty much lost count and so you're constantly drinking
between these little dishes. At one point, I didn't want
be tipsy in the people's house so I thought that I could be slick and go to  Pepsi only, no vodka or anything like that and when
it came time for the next toast, someone noticed that I only had Pepsi and they
said, "Oh, does Jasmine not have alcohol?" "Why doesn't she have alcohol?" And I was
told that I needed to have alcohol so yeah before we continued the toast, I had
to get alcohol and I had to drink. If you're a lightweight or if you don't like
drinking, it's going to be hard to be prepared because it's strong stuff.
For example, we went to my boyfriend's father's house and he pulled out
something called-- I'm going off of my memory but here's the
bottle-- and when you pull out this bottle and then you do this... It burns. Oh okay, that shows how strong it is? And we have to drink this? Wait, wait, wait. What am I supposed to do with that? Blow it out, yeah? Oh, my dear. If you are setting the alcohol on fire to tell me how strong is and then want me
to drink it, that's not something-- I don't want that. I don't want that strong of an alcohol
but yeah in Poland, you will drink. You will have to drink, it is polite to
drink. Those are the fun facts that I learned this Christmas. If you are
from Poland, and I missed any traditions, please drop them in the comment section
below. If you're not from Poland, and you have unique Christmas traditions where
you're from, be sure to drop those in the comment section as well. I hope you guys
enjoyed the video. Don't forget to like, share, and subscribe. Don't forget to
follow me on Instagram @JasmineT_TV and I will see you guys
next time. Bye!|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||when I go out I come back to Poland Poland
is home but have you ever had like any problem uh linked to your color [Music] so this is your YouTube Star [Music] what are you doing there [Music] [Applause] [Music] hi guys welcome
back to my channel I'm going to try a new activity it's called kangofit it's the first
time I will be doing it so I will try to share this with you I hope that I will be able to
Vlog there or just to record few parts I know that we have to wear like specific shoes [Music] hey guys I've just received my order from
the African shop I have ordered some plantains a ticket and she comes to get them ready because we are
going on the barbecue I decided to try this I saw in one video that if you have green
plantain and you want them to be ripped so you can add one apple and close the bag for
like few days I will let you know if it works and if the test is the same [Music] hi hello how are you doing I'm good I'm good I'm in the kitchen doing
Grill okay and you need some meat foreign fish but this is not any kind of fish it's mackerel
but not any kind of Macross that's got a little bit of oil okay then we have some chicken
not any kind of chicken but spice with cream okay looking tasty I see that you have your
cameroonian jersey yes you know I come from the continent Cameroon ah okay continent we
will see if this food will be tasty you know there are a lot of people waiting to eat we
were supposed to be eating a tree these people show up at 5 pm and then there was no gas
yeah so we had to wait that the whole could buy some gas and now we are starting to get
the food ready yes how long have you been living in Poland it depends what it looks
like long for someone for me I think being more than 10 years or less than 10 years it's
still not been long do you feel polish uh fill in police it's an understatement because
uh Sweden police should be born polish but I live here and I feel comfortable okay you
feel home yes somehow when I go out I come back to Poland Poland is home but have you
ever had like any problem uh linked to your color of course even in the US there are people
having problems with color you are defending Poland too much yes because I Feel Home Holland
is my home and I will always defend poles so great thank you for this feedback can you
can you tell us about work in Poland how easy is it for you to find job and saying easy
there's no way in this world where it's easy to get a job you just need to be searching
and have a lot of good luck in terms of looking for job in Portland yes the market is open
there are a lot of Corporations here in Poland looking for people who speaks English and
other languages not only in languages you have companies which are looking for hand
work like people who can do physical work as well so in terms of job there is job okay
job for everyone but you just need to be searching and you just need to have the good luck as
well as I said which advice you can give to someone who is out of Europe because actually
people who are sending me messages are in Africa most of them other in like in Dubai
or India and they would like to come to Poland for work so which advice you can like give
to them advice for people out of forum I will say that out of Europe out of Europe actually
uh don't stop applying there are a lot of companies with online application you can
apply from abroad and after you apply pray on your good luck yeah so that they can pick
you and if they pick you then they will do all the documentation for you for today and
get the visa yeah talking about the documentation in my opinion I feel like they are giving
less work permit than a few years ago when I came it's like maybe also it's because there
are now too many uh foreigners here in Poland so it's just easy for them to find someone
with a specific language here than out of the country I think the same for sure the
poor the politics have changed before some years ago when I was repeating a lot from
outside but now there are a lot of foreigners which came some years ago and a lot of people
finished their education at the moment and now there's the employee Market which is full
of people currently [Music] hi guys I forgot to take my scarf and it's
uh it's cold hey where are you going with the dress on
Thursday I've just received my food I took um I regret I usually regret why that's why
I want to dance we can sure [Music] hello we came to the restaurant but unfortunately
there are a lot of people waiting so we are sitting here outside and feeding Sean because
his time his lunch time passed already so he was very hungry and we are waiting I will
show you the line I've heard that food here is very tasty so
we will see if the weight was Justified so foreign ER I took burata hi what are you doing there was X was extremely good in that place in
30 or 40 minutes outside the way this works foreign today we are trying Nigerian food I've ordered
two meals from our big one if you if you're in Gross off and you want to try Nigerian
food you can contact her I've ordered egusi and afang or a fan yeah I don't even know
what is these are fun I don't know really but um I will try that today so this is your
YouTube star from Poland I will be warm yes if you don't know her check her Channel she's
the star she's the African star in Poland she's doing everything she's cooking she's
organizing even she's uh what you are doing applications of traveling applications so
for vloggers like influencer everything and today we will try her food I I ordered because
I hope it's nice because it's not nice I will say the truth I cannot lie I'm sorry your mother will see that you didn't learn
well you know no problem [Music] how is it hi guys uh so this did my hair and
I was thinking to make a video with her but finally we were just enjoying gossiping you
know yeah and now I'm going to to take my food because I ordered Ghanaian okra soup
I decided to try different African food in Poland so yeah just to try something new something
different everyone has his own way of cooking so when I'm cooking okra I know how it will
be but if someone else is cooking it can be different so yeah I'm interested to try this
new taste this is she told me that this is like like cassava flour and corn flour first time I'm trying this is different it's
different than normal Fufu let me heat the soup and see how it tastes I see that there
are some shrimp many other stuff at this moment I have to try the food my husband
and kids are sleeping already I will eat this food put a movie watch it enjoy and just have
the best time alone [Music] [Music] guess who's the model photo today
it's not Shanaya that's me we were contacted by a photograph asking if we could join a
project and I said yes because I thought it would be for Shania but finally she wanted
me to be the model so yeah it was a great experience and I can't wait to see the results I moved in Poland I had to stop my laser hair
removal because I didn't know a place where they could make lather for dark skin and then
I went pregnant I was breastfeeding and went pregnant I got a new breastfeeding so I couldn't
do lather because when you are pregnant or breastfeeding you cannot just do laser so
now I decided to go back to it because waxing is destroying my skin I have ingrowned hair
I have dark spot I'm happy I found a place where I can do laser because I'm a hairy woman
you thank you for watching the video please remember to subscribe activate your notification
support and be sure thank you guys bye this is the result after five days so depending
on how rip I want them to be I can remove now or leave again for few days [Music]|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Poland is the country in the east of Europe. It still has its own currency, a lot of unique
traditions, and some wonderful places to visit. Poland is underestimated in terms of tourism. Here you will find wonderful cities, beautiful
nature, different types of landscapes and quite cheap life. If you are in Poland for a couple of days,
Krakow is a recommended city to visit. Don’t focus on big cities like Warsaw. Better go to small cities and villages to
see Poland from the inside, because it’s worth your time. But be careful with the language. Not a lot of Polish people speak English and
you aren’t expected to understand a word in quite a weird Polish language.|||welcome to point travel today is our trip to a beautiful and wonderful country we will fly together to Poland Poland is a beautiful country with a rich history and culture making it a popular destination for travelers from all over the world from its stunning architecture and historic sites to its Scenic natural landscapes and delicious Cuisine there's something for everyone to enjoy in Poland your trip to Poland is sure to never be boring let us now discover 10 amazing places in Poland but before we get started subscribe to our Channel and turn on notifications to get you all new [Music] number one Warsaw Warsaw the capital of Poland and one of the largest cities in the country is a vibrant and bustling city with a thriving arts and culture scene excellent restaurants and thriving nightlife located in the central part of Poland it is known for its Rich history and cultural heritage as well as its modern Cosmopolitan atmosphere tourist attractions in Warsaw include the royal castle which dates back to the 16th century the old town which has been beautifully restored there are also several excellent museums as well as parks and Gardens such as the lazyanke park that provide a welcome escape from the city's busy streets whether you are interested in history or culture or simply want to experience the energy and excitement of a major European city Warsaw has something to offer everyone [Music] number two rotzlaff [Music] ratsloff is a city in Western Poland and is the largest city in the lower silesian boivot ship it is known for its Rich history beautiful architecture and vibrant cultural scene some of the most notable landmarks in Brock's law include the gothic Saint Elizabeth's Church the Renaissance town hall and the Centennial Hall which is a modernist building that was declared a UNESCO world heritage site in 2006. the city is also famous for its numerous Bridges and waterways with over 100 Bridges crossing the odor river rotzlaff is home to several universities and has a thriving student population making it a hub for cultural and artistic events Additionally the city has a well-developed tourism industry and is a popular destination for visitors from around the world [Music] number three Krakow Krakow is a city in southern Poland and is the second largest city in the country it is considered one of the most beautiful cities in Europe and is rich in history and culture the city is known for its historical town which is a UNESCO world heritage site and is home to many important landmarks including wall Castle St Mary's Basilica and the main Market Square Krakow was once the capital of Poland and was an important center of trade culture and learning during the Middle Ages today it is a popular tourist destination and is renowned for its vibrant nightlife Rich cultural heritage and stunning architecture foreign [Music] is a popular Mountain Resort Town located in the southern part of Poland in the tatra mountains it is known for its unique architecture stunning natural beauty and Rich cultural heritage the town is renowned for its skiing in winter sports but also offers a range of outdoor activities such as hiking climbing and horseback riding in the summer visitors to zacapane can also enjoy traditional polish cuisine as well as explore local museums and galleries the town is easily accessible from the nearby city of Krakow making it a popular destination for both polish and international tourists whether you are looking for adventure or simply want to relax in a picturesque Mountain setting zachapane has something to offer everyone [Music] number five tatra National Park [Music] tatra National Park is a protected area located in the tatra mountains of Southern Poland it was established in 1954. the park is known for its unique and diverse mountain landscape including glacial Valleys High Peaks and Alpine Meadows it is also home to a rich variety of wildlife including Bears wolves and Lynx the park features well-marked hiking trails allowing visitors to explore the area and enjoy its natural beauty as well as several Mountain Huts for overnight stays in addition the park is a popular destination for winter sports offering opportunities for skiing and snowboarding overall tatra National Park is an important site for both nature conservation and outdoor recreation [Music] number six tauren foreign is a city in Northern Poland located on the Vistula River it is famous for its well-preserved medieval Old Town which has been designated a UNESCO world heritage site the city is home to numerous historic landmarks including the 14th century St John's Cathedral the Copernicus Museum and the impressive City walls which still stand today tauren is also famous for its gingerbread a traditional pastry that has been produced in the city for centuries in addition to its Rich history and cultural heritage tauren is a modern and dynamic city with a thriving economy a growing Arts scene and a variety of shops restaurants and cafes foreign [Music] is a seaside resort Town located in Northern Poland on the Baltic Coast it is part of the TriCity metropolitan area along with the cities of Gdansk and Dinia sapod is known for its long Sandy Beach and Pier the longest wooden pier in Europe the town is famous for its architecture including the Art Nouveau Style Grand Hotel crooked house and sapot museum sapod is a popular tourist destination with its attractive beaches vibrant nightlife and cultural attractions in addition to its beauty and cultural heritage sapod is also known for its mild climate making it a popular destination for tourists year round number eight good dance gedansk is a port city located on the Baltic Coast in Northern Poland it is the capital of the Pomeranian boivot ship and is one of the largest cities in the country Gdansk has a rich history dating back to the 10th century and was a major Center of Trade during the Middle Ages the city was heavily damaged during World War II but has since been restored to its former glory with many historic buildings and monuments Still Standing today some of the most famous landmarks in Gdansk include the main Town Hall the Neptune Fountain the Saint Mary's Church and the long Market gedansk is also famous for its role in the solidarity movement which was instrumental in the fall of Communism in Eastern Europe today gedansk is a thriving modern city with a vibrant cultural scene a thriving arts and entertainment industry and a growing food and drink scene [Music] foreign [Music] the Crooked Forest the Crooked Forest is a Grove of approximately 400 pine trees located near the town of now zarnawa in Western Poland the trees are notable for their unusual bent trunks which grow in a distinctive curve at a 90 degree angle the exact cause of the tree's curvature is unknown but it is believed to have been caused by human intervention possibly as a result of a technique used to encourage the trees to grow straight and then be harvested for use as ship masts the Crooked Forest has become a popular tourist destination and a mystery for scientists and Forestry experts despite the many theories the true cause of the tree's curvature remains a mystery regardless the Crooked Forest is a unique and visually striking natural wonder that attracts visitors from around the world number 10 chesin foreign is a city located in Northwestern Poland near the coast of the Baltic Sea and is the capital of the West Pomeranian boivot ship the city is known for its Rich history dating back to the 9th century schessing is a modern city with a vibrant cultural scene a lively University population and a growing economy schessing is also home to many attractions including the gothic Saint James Cathedral the 18th century Pomeranian Duke's castle and the stressing Philharmonic in recent years schessing has undergone major Renovations and modernization and has become a popular tourist destination in Poland whether you're interested in exploring its Rich history experiencing its vibrant cultural scene or simply enjoying its natural beauty chessing is a city that has something to offer everyone [Music] in conclusion Poland is a country rich in history culture and natural beauty these 10 destinations are just a few of the many amazing places to visit in this incredible country whether you're interested in exploring stunning architecture Scenic Landscapes or Rich cultural heritage Poland has something to offer every traveler if you enjoyed this movie consider giving it a like and subscribing to our Channel thanks for watching goodbye foreign [Music]|||* 1 of November|||while the world's superpowers 
struggle with Wars and crises   Poland is undergoing an incredible 
transformation growing faster than   any other economy in Europe and faster 
than countries like South Korea or Singapore military observers see the Nazi 
lightning Warfare is setting the style for   modern battle this is how Poland looked 30 years 
ago a simple poor postcommunist country but this   is how Poland looks today it is expected that if 
Poland continues to grow by 2030 it could surpass   the economy of United Kingdom in addition to its 
economic rise Poland is building one of the most   powerful armies in all of Europe and is becoming 
a powerful threat to the world's great Powers but   how did Poland manage to evolve so much and 
is it possible that it will fail to see how   Poland evolves so quickly we have to go back 
in time and see the country's history in 1939   Poland was invaded by Nazi Germany which marked 
the beginning of World War II during that time   Poland suffered significant human and material IAL 
losses more precisely 20% of the Polish population   was killed and the country was devastated these 
losses had a serious impact on the country's   economy and development after the end of World 
War II Poland was freed from Nazi occupation but   became a state under the control of the Soviet 
Union in this context Poland adopted communism   during the Communist period the state nationalized 
most private Industries and businesses leaving the   economy under State control but after the fall of 
commun ISM in 1989 Poland faced the challenge of   transitioning to a capitalist system and opening 
up to the global economy this transition was   difficult because the country had no experience 
in the operation of free markets all these factors   contributed to the transformation of Poland into 
a country with economic difficulties and outdated   infrastructure after gaining independence in 
1989 at that time no one would have expected   that in the following years Poland would 
evolve and reach what it is today let's take   a step back to the present and understand 
why Poland has been steadily growing and progressing in today's world Poland stands out 
as a shining example of economic growth and   development this transformation did not happen 
by chance it was the result of several factors   coming together to propel the country forward 
these factors include smart economic reforms   Poland's integration into the NATO in 1999 as 
well as a highly competitive and well-educated   Workforce in addition significant infrastructure 
investment and sustained political stability have   also contributed to Poland's impressive success 
from the years 1989 to 2018 Poland's gross   domestic product increased a remarkable 826 times 
which was one of the most impressive growth rates   in all of Europe during that period a pivotal 
moment in Poland's Journey occurred in 2004 when   the country became a member of the European Union 
this membership brought a multitude of benefits   Poland gained access to development funds the 
ability to participate in European markets and   a commitment to adhering to European standards and 
regulations all of these aspects had a positive   impact on Poland's economy in summary Poland's 
continuous expansion and remarkable Economic   Development have been driven by a combination of 
smart policies International alliances a skilled   Workforce significant infrastructure Investments 
and the opportunities presented by its European   union membership this success story has placed 
Poland in the spotlight as a thriv ding nation   in the modern world one crucial milestone 
in Poland's economic transformation was the   privatization of state-owned Enterprises in the 
Communist era the government had ownership and   control over most economic sectors privatization 
changed this by transferring these Enterprises   to private ownership this shift gave rise to a 
competitive free market for businesses and allowed   new owners to introduce fresh ideas and efficiency 
in running these companies Poland's move towards   privatization also opened its doors to foreign 
investment many foreign investors found Poland an   appealing Market because of its skilled Workforce 
and lower operating costs compared to other   Western European nations the arrival of foreign 
investments brought in not only Capital but also   advanced technology and valuable expertise all of 
which contributed to the growth and development   of the private sector in Poland this transition 
from State ownership to private Enterprise along   with foreign investment played a key role in the 
country's remarkable economic growth [Applause] Poland's location between Germany and Russia 
has historically given it strong reasons to   form a strong military throughout its 
history the country has faced numerous   invasions divisions colonization and struggles 
for Independence even today while being a NATO   member the historical memory of these events 
is still alive While most European countries   have benefited from peace dividends and reduced 
military spending Poland has maintained mained   its military funding at one of the highest 
levels in NATO after the Russian invasion   of Ukraine the country stepped up its 
efforts Poland declared its intent to   increase military spending to 5% of its GDP 
within a few years surpassing the levels of   any other NATO member furthermore Poland 
expanded its Armed Forces doubling their   size to reach 300,000 soldiers and invested in 
acquiring thousands of Tanks fighter jets and   other military equipment in 2022 Poland ranked 
18th in the world in terms of military spending   and was among the nine NATO member states 
that kept their military spending above the   required level of 2% of annual GDP Poland's 
ambitious plan to develop the most powerful   land forces in Europe represents a remarkable and 
significant military expansion in modern [Music] history now let's see what Poland really produces and 
through which Fields it managed to expand so   much agriculture is one of the largest Industries 
in Poland which although it accounts for 3.8% of   the country's GDP and is responsible for 12.7% 
of Poland's Workforce the industry is largely   private as private Farms account for 90% of all 
agricultural land the country leads as the biggest   producer of potatoes and Rye on the continent 
and it's also one of the top contributors to   the global sugar beat production moreover Poland 
stands out as a significant producer of rape seed   various grains pork poultry eggs and beef this 
variety of agricultural contributions underlines   Poland's importance in the farming World in 2019 
the country was the fifth world producer of silver   the 12th world producer of copper the 14th world 
producer of sulfur and the 14th world producer   of salt another major industry in Poland is the 
energy industry the country is a major player   in global coal production and is the ninth largest 
coal producer in the world producing approximately   78 megatons of coal most of Poland's coal is 
consumed domestically with the country being   the second largest consumer of coal in Europe 
with its European coal consumption second only   to Germany however despite these advances not 
all is well in the Polish economy a significant   problem is the high unemployment rate which was 
11% in 2013 but this is continuously decreasing   reaching 7% in 2015 making it one of the 
highest in Europe in conclusion Poland has   made significant progress in recent years 
do you think this growth will continue and   the country will become one of the most important 
European nations tell your opinion in the [Music] comments he|||* 1 of November|||U.S. ARMY INTELLIGENCE OFFICER AND NOW AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY COLONEL, FIRST OF ALL, THAT THE PRESIDENT. WENT ON TELEVISION BALI. I WAS A LITTLE SOUNDED BY. I THOUGHT HE MISSPOKE BECAUSE HE SAID HE WASN'T SURE HE DIDN'T THINK THOSE MISSILES CAME FROM RUSSIA. MAYBE HE WAS TALKING ABOUT THEM COMING FROM BAYLOR, RUSSIA FLYING. MAYBE FROM. YOU FROM THE YEARS OUR OCEAN BASE TO LAUNCH. YEAH. I'M TRYING TO GET A READ ON WHAT YOU HEARD THE PRESIDENT SAY ABOUT THIS. WELL, I MEAN, I CERTAINLY TOOK IT AS THEY PROBABLY WEREN'T FIRED FROM RUSSIA. WERE PROBABLY RUSSIAN IN ORIGIN. BUT THAT'S NOT SAYING A LOT BECAUSE MANY OF THE MISSILES THROUGHOUT THAT CASES THE ORDINANCE THAT RUSSIA AND HAS BEEN USING WHETHER FIRE CORRECTION TERRITORY FROM BELARUSIAN IS IN MANY CASES DECADE OLD AND THEN UKRAINIANS HAVE THEIR OWN A MISSILE SYSTEMS THAT ARE EXACTLY THE SAME AS THE RUSSIAN SYSTEM SAYS I'VE GOT THEM FROM RUSSIA WHEN THE SOVIET UNION BROKE UP IN THE EARLY 90'S. SO THERE'S A LOT OF VERY OLD ORDINANCE THAT WAS MANUFACTURED RUSSIA. BUT IT THAT IS FLYING AROUND THAT THEATER OF OPERATIONS. SO THAT'S THAT'S ACTUALLY. I WANT TO BOUNCE RIGHT OFF WHAT YOU JUST SAID, A LOT OF OLD ORDINANCE THAT'S BOUNCING AROUND THAT THEATER. I HAVE HEARD NUMBER MILITARY EXPERTS SAY TODAY IT IS ENTIRELY POSSIBLE FIRST OF ALL, THESE THINGS ARE LOUSY. THEY THEY ARE ORDINANCE JUST CRAPPIE AIM AND THAT IT IS POSSIBLE THAT THE UKRAINE'S ACTUALLY WERE FIRING ANTI-AIRCRAFT FIRE AT THIS THING AND KNOCKED IT OFF COURSE OR BLEWETT AND PART OF IT, YOU KNOW, ENDED UP EXPLODING OVER THE BORDER. I GUESS THE QUESTION IS DOES THAT MATCH HER. AND I I ASK THAT BECAUSE IF RUSSIA PLAYING WITH FIRE THAT CLOSE TO THE BORDER. THEY KNOW WHAT COULD HAPPEN. AND YOU KNOW THE THING HAPPEN? SHOULD ARTICLE 5 B AND VOTE WHEREBY NATO SAYS, ALL RIGHT HERE IT'S ON. I THINK IT'S VERY UNLIKELY THE ARTICLE, 5 OF VOTE IN A SITUATION LIKE THIS, IT THE RUSSIANS HAVE FIRED SOMETHING DELIBERATELY AT INTO POLICE SHARED TORY ALBEIT RIGHT OVER POSSIBLE IF THEY'RE TRYING TO SEND A BUT IT'S EQUALLY LIKELY WE'RE PROBABLY MORE LIKELY THAT IT WAS AN ACCIDENT OF LOT OF THIS ORDINANCE REALLY OL IT'S NOT TERRIBLY ACCURATE, ESPECIALLY WHEN HE'S BEEN REPURPOSED FROM SYSTEMS ORIGINALLY DESIGNED TO DO OTHER THINGS. SO ALL OF THAT'S GOING TO BE FACTORS THAT ARE PARTIES INVOLVED IN THIS WHEN THE WEAPON TECHNICAL TEAMS ARE GOING TO GO IN THERE. THEY'RE GOING TO TAKE A LOOK AT THE PIECES THEY'RE GOING TO TRY THAT WHERE PARTS REGIONALLY CAME FROM. AND THE INTERMEDIATE STEPS IT MADE IN ORDER TO GET WERE WAS WHAT UNIT SOMEBODY WHERE WAS STORED, SO ON AND SO FORTH. AND THAT COULD BE TIED TO OTHER SUCH AS THE RADIO INTERCEPTS WERE FROM OPEN SAY OR C A VARIETY OF OTHER SOURCES AND THEY'RE GOING ACTUALLY PINK THIS PICTURE. AND THAT'S WHAT'S GOING TO DETERMINE WHAT HAPPENS NEXT TERMS OF WHAT THE NEXT STEPS ARE FOR NATO AND FOR THE UNITED STATES, MORE SPECIFICALLY. WE HAVE ABOUT 20 SECONDS LEFT. I HAVE TO ASK YOU BECAUSE SO MANY PEOPLE ONLINE SAYING IS THIS THE, YOU KNOW, ARCH FRONT AND FRANZ FERDINAND MOMENT THAT THAT KICKED OFF WHERE BEEN I'M SURE HAS ALL SORTS OF SMELLS OF ALLIANCE'S, ET CETERA. BUT IS IT? IT IS ABSOLUTELY A PROVOCATION. WHETHER IT WAS AN ACCIDENT OR DELIBERATE. IT IS SERIOUS AND NEEDS TO BE HANDLED AS SUCH, BUT BECAUSE IT IS POTENTIALLY SO DRAMATICALLY SERIOUS THAT JUST MEANS THAT MORE RESOURCES WILL BE POURED INTO MAKING ABSOLUTELY SURE ABILITY WHERE THAT MISSILE CAME FROM, WHO FIRED IT AND UNDER WHAT CONDITIONS DIDN'T END UP LANDING IN POLAND. FOR WHAT IT'S WORTH, THE RUSSIANS ARE DENIED TAKING ANY ACTIONS OUTSIDE OF UKRAINIAN BORDERS AS WE WOULD ONLY EXPECT THEM TO SAY. THANK YOU SO MUCH. LIEUTENANT COLONEL JAMES HICKEY. GOOD TO HAVE YOU ON. WE'LL HAVE YOU BACK FOR SURE. THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR|||how difficult is it to study a medical degree 
in Poland what would be your biggest challenges   would language be your biggest hurdle let's hear 
it to the experience of Dr Jennifer Castaneda   she studied medicine there passed the medical 
board exam and is a practicing doctor and a   professor in Warsaw Poland [Music] hi Avic thanks 
for inviting me over yes it's been worth the wait   so Jen my first question for you is how long 
have you been in Poland well I came to Poland   in 1995 so that makes it uh 27 years 27 right 
 well I started medicine in UP Manila   with the intermed program and I guess I was a bit 
of an idealist I didn't like the way some doctors   treated the patients in in the hospital I was 
in so I said well I think I'd stop medicine I   started Masters of Science in genetics in UP but 
then I was given a proposal if I wanted to help   out in the establishment of center of formation 
for women in Krakow and so well I decided to start   this adventure of coming over to Poland so in 
the end when I was asked what kind of studies I   would push through I didn't have any other idea 
options so so I said medicine so I went through   in intense polish program to enter medical studies 
in Krakow so I started medicine there I finished   it and then I did my PhD in another city it's 
called Szczecin in Poland and then afterwards   I actually went back to genetics because I did 
my specialization in critical genetics in here   in Warsaw in The Institute of mother and child 
which is a public pediatric hospital and OB gyne   in hospital and that's where I'm working right 
now as a clinical geneticist in our genetic   counseling unit so what is the beauty of Poland 
for you looking back this is 27 years what is   the beauty of Poland for you as a professional and 
as a person okay well I would say um I'd probably   um direct these words to people who would have to 
go to another place to study or to work I think   what gave me a lot of positive input in this place 
in Poland is that it is a place that's culturally   very close to my own and I like the way that 
between the Philippines and Poland even if you   know the climate is totally different if I could 
just show you and perhaps I will be able to show   you the snow that's now falling I see through 
the window so the climate is very different but   cultural wise probably because of a very similar 
history of religion that there the Catholicism   is as in the Philippines also it's um it's the 
religion of the majority here so cultural wise not   only religion but then it's a strong family ties 
a strong interpersonal relationships so I think   this is very very valuable here in in Poland and 
I think it was a it's it's like a treasure that   that I myself was um was benefiting from what 
would be your biggest hurdle especially in the   beginnings you're asking about this a big hurdle 
when you transfer to a different country and you   know that you're gonna stay there for a lot of 
years aside from the challenges of the language   I think it's the confrontation with sometimes 
different mentalities it could be in contrast what   you were used to before and I think how at least 
I managed with that is that I was always trying to   be at least very open to the differences but not 
putting so much attention into the differences I   think what helps is to look for the aspects which 
unite us like the universal values that we share   with people of different cultures and not to put 
so much attention into the differences to be open   to the values which you know you could even learn 
from them but I also thing it's very important to   keep your own culture your own tradition in their 
place not to compare I just learned later on not   to say oh we did it in a different way in my 
country adapt yourself to how the people live   in this place because in the same way that you're 
learning from others actually you are enriching   them with your own traditions your own customs 
and and your own ways of thinking did you have   classmates from other non-European countries 
well in Poland actually because of the history   of Communism there were a lot of people from 
post-communist countries in my case I was the   only Filipino in in my batch and Asian I think 
I was the only one I had friends from Ukraine   Latvia mostly neighboring countries there are 
some medical programs in English here so it's   a paid English program I was lucky enough to get 
into the Polish program well the challenge is that   everything was in Polish but then there's still 
free education here free University education so   that was of course of utmost benefit that I didn't 
have to pay for my medical studies and actually   medicine here in Poland is in quite a good level 
a lot of very good professionals perhaps it   doesn't have the modern Innovations technological 
innovations not all of them like in the United   States or probably in the UK but there are a lot 
of a spirit of entrepreneurship and so I would say   even in genetics that some diagnostic methods 
in genetics which are now very much in use in   other Western countries are beginning to be used 
in Poland can you describe to us your experience   about the language what are you thinking about 
learning a language is totally different from   your own because I remember when I was already 
planning to go to Poland and I uh someone gave me   a text from a new polish newspaper and I couldn't 
even pronounce the words because there are so many   consonants in the world in the you know there 
are a lot of s z dz together in in the Polish   language is and why it's like a vowel if you think 
of it as a consonant you couldn't read the words   but anyway what I was thinking in general I think 
what helped me was not to be such a perfectionist   because I know of some people who are like they 
would only speak the language if they knew that   they had it in a perfect State I mean that they 
wouldn't commit errors and I think that's a very   erroneous way of trying to learn a language in 
a country where you know that you will live for   for many more years so I think what helped me was 
actually I was advised to do that just you know   just to go ahead just to speak with people and 
even if you know that you'll make some errors I   had a lot of friends who were very very patient 
with me that when there was a there was a word   in in the lecture in Biochemistry that I didn't 
understand I always had my friend beside me was   always explaining to me so not to get frustrated 
that you don't grammatically speak so well in   the beginning the other thing is that learning a 
language takes a lot of energy from the neurons   but also helped me is that to take some breaks 
I mean to sometimes read something in English   or talk to someone in English so that then the 
neurons don't get so exhausted someone was saying   that you already know you're speaking fluently 
or at least this language is a bit more in your   nature when you start dreaming in this language 
or when you start counting in this language   spontaneously and I think that's just really 
what happened it's good that you talked about   not being a perfectionist what is the difference 
between striving for perfection and perfectionism   that's very difficult question you posed to me but uh when I think about   it and I thought about it a lot recently also 
because I forgot to tell you that but I was very   much interested in bioethics and so apart from 
clinical genetics I actually did some training   in bioethics and now I'm in a master program 
in global by ethics because I do organize some   bioethics seminars for students and so talking a 
lot with young people then you see that there's   a tendency towards perfectionism in the way even 
the educational process is being led like in the   universities or even in school so the difference 
between striving for perfection and perfectionism   when I think about it well I wouldn't say I'm a 
I'm an expert on the field but I think striving   for perfection includes in the process some 
stages of failures a person who's not   a perfectionist would take advantage of these 
little or big failures to move towards the aim   without getting frustrated the idea here is to 
treat these failures as a challenge to actually   change something in the process or to grow in some 
other I don't know in virtues in in some values   but keeping the aim in mind so a perfectionist 
I think what happens that's why there's some   kind of frustration is that they don't know how to 
manage these stages of failures or imperfections   which have to be accepted as I think part of the 
process towards achieving a name one good thing   is that to know how to ask for help actually 
to admit that we can't perfectly go towards an   objective just we ourselves and so to know how 
to ask for help and to appreciate the help that   you are being given and the support that comes 
from the environment friends family could you   give us a little explanation for dummies 
of what is genetics and what is bioethics   I'm so lucky actually I consider myself a very 
lucky person that I'm into these fields which   are I would say they're very specific in the 
sense that not everyone likes genetics for   instance clinical genetics as a field of medicine 
you deal with very rare diseases genetic diseases   so there's a lot of going to the molecules here 
I mean the genetic basis of diseases which now   actually includes the very various you know other 
fields of specialization because there's genetics   in Pediatrics in neonatology in Gynecology and OB 
gyne there's genetics in dermatology and oncology   and all that the thing is that really when you 
diagnose genetic diseases it's not the type that   you can say okay I have diagnosed this disease 
and I can cure you in the case of genetics they   are usually rare incurable diseases but it's 
a different kind of support that geneticists   give to families In which genetic diseases are 
diagnosed um I would say it's more support like   giving more much more information on this rare 
disease which is very difficult to know so much   about it because other other doctors would would 
know less probably because they're very rare the   kind of psychological support or to give them more 
information on what could be the surveillance in   the case of a child with a genetic disease so 
it's difficult to cure quite impossible in most   genetic diseases but you can care for someone in 
a different way and bioethics is actually a field   which is of course not only tied to genetics but 
to all different fields of biological sciences and   bioethics is keeping the person the good of the 
person in mind bioethics is a part of philosophy   and I think when one is involved in such a very 
molecular field like genetics bioethics gives   the professional a wider perspective because it 
makes you go from the molecules to the person   the person himself or bioethics deals with the 
ethical aspects of biological sciences and I   would say that in genetics there's a lot of it how 
you use the genetic technology how you diagnose   for instance fetuses during the prenatal period so 
there's a lot of a lot of different areas actually   when you said from molecules to person I totally 
understand it now very simple for dummies really   so there are only four more minutes and Dr Jen has 
to go to another appointment so my last question   would be if there are some professionals who 
are moving to another country for professional   development for Graduate Studies like what you 
have experienced what would be your top three   advices for them first to keep the aim in mind 
why we're going to another place then I think   to keep this objective in mind it helps us to 
go through the process of the hurdles to the   difficulties in order to reach the aim at the 
same time is to accept that there will be some   difficulties to accept that that's part of the 
process and to admit it to people and to take   advantage and be thankful for the support that 
other people can give so that's what the second   is to be very open to the differences in culture 
customs traditions and to try to see what is very   positive in these differences that we see and 
the third is probably to take care of oneself you   know a very hygienic way of life that means to 
know how to rest to know how to take care of   friendships of interpersonal relationships to 
be in touch with one's family so I think that's   what I would say avic thanks so much for for the 
interview and it was wonderful to be chatting with   you on this Sunday evening there morning here and 
we have a very blessed Christmas to all of you if   you like this video you better watch this and 
also this other one don't forget to subscribe   click the notification bell so that you will know 
when I am uploading I'll see you in the next one|||Armed Forces of the Republic of Poland
It was established in 1990. The Polish army constantly keeps its troops
active at the border. reason for this is the constant military conflicts. The Polish army consists of three forces - land
, air , naval. Recently, the number of soldiers has increased. this increase is due to Russia. Soldiers make up the bulk of the army. In the ground forces, it has 250,000 personnel
120,000 of these personnel are active. It has 800 tanks, which include Mo1 Abrams
, Leopard 2 , PT-91 Twardy , T-72 tanks. Among the tanks , the m1a1 and the leopard
tank are modern tank. 250 tanks have been ordered from the United
States, with deliveries expected to start in 2022. 28 scheduled for delivery in 2022. Armored vehicles 4,786 , Towed artillery 609
, Missile systems , 197 The most powerful aircraft in the air force
is the f16. MiG-29 and Su-22 are also in the inventory. An order has been placed for 20 TB2 unmanned
aerial vehicles. TB2 is manufactured by Turkey. The Polish air force has air forces according
to its region, which includes 452 aircraft. Fighter aircraft 91 , Training aircraft 96
, Transport aircraft 49 Helicopters 207 , Attack helicopters 30. The Gawron-class American-built 2,150-ton
modern corvettes are in the inventory. ORP General Tadeusz Kościuszko, frigates
of the class in the Polish navy. It is the best frigate of the navy. TOTAL NAVY:86 , FRIGATES:2 , CORVETTES:2 MINE
WARFARE:21 , SUBMARINES:1 , PATROL VESSELS:3.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Say... How many of you are able to say a few words
about Europe? Show of hands! It's pretty diverse, huh? Well how many of you are able to say a few
words about Poland? That's right, only a handful. Because Poland, it seems, has always lacked
proper publicity. But how many of you would like to learn a
bit about this European country? Ah, well allow me then to be your host, or
a guide if you will... After all, Poland is my home.|||Friends! I'm tired of being at your parties .. And on... parties without the letter "V"... How to do this joke more western? "Im tired of looking at your pics and siting on your sticks." What the... Let's get him guys down! They don't respect me ... If only someone could write something nice for me ... Unknown: you will swallow I'm already tired of several hours of stress. I just fell and they seized the moment. I couldn't move or say. I just lay down. They took advantage of the fact that I was powerless Am i coward?! No! I will take and win them all! I'll put their heads on my shelf! Oh no, I was joking. Welcome to camp Navarro.|||first of all a very big thank you to all
of you for supporting so much and uh yes
welcome back to the channel guys i hope you all are doing extremely fine
and in case you are new here my name is Sayali and i make
videos related to travel food and experiences
so currently i am located out of warsaw poland and
yes in case you're wondering where i am from
uh so i am from india mumbai and uh yes so today we are going to
karaford for some grocery shopping it's been two weeks that
we haven't gone for grocery shopping so we are going to kara4 and uh
i will show you guys uh uh how are the things that you get there
and what actually what are the things you get there and
how you can manage your grocery shopping and for grocery shopping you also have
options like lidl you have a betronka then you have ocean
which is also very uh cheap in terms of uh money and
therefore uh is also there so if you if at all you guys know what are
the things that you get in bedroom which you don't get
in cara for which you get in careful you get and
don't get it in bedroom car any other supermarket just comment down
below so that you know even we can explore and maybe i
can include this in other videos as well so yes do comment
down below and all of a sudden the temperature in
poland or rather in warsaw has decreased to 15 degrees celsius
approximately during the daytime and during night it's around 11 to 13
degrees and it's quite rainy here you can see and
yes until last week it was horrible horrible summers and it was quite
hot here also so now we are feeling a little better and
it's quite pleasant but now it seems it's going to rain
so me and ketan are going to rush to this supermarket and
you guys enjoy this video and i hope this will be informative as well for you
and yes let's go many of you guys were pinging me and
asking me if i wear makeup on daily basis or it's only
for vlogs but if you must have noticed it guys i
have stopped wearing makeup like i don't really put concealers and
foundations because i don't want myself to get addicted to
it because once looking at yourself in a flawless manner then it becomes very
difficult to you know actually get to the natural
side of yours but yes that's the only reason i have
stopped wearing makeup and i generally just put on some blush or i
just put on lipsticks and that's it that is my go-to
makeup these days and i make sure that my hair is done
properly yes and that is all i do on my face
while i while i'm going out or while i'm
vlogging and obviously when i'm at home i don't really uh do
anything to my face and it's just a moisturizer
so i hope that answers your question guys so for first now we will have
our lunch here and only then proceed with the
shopping and in case you are wondering until now why i
why haven't i had put the mask so that was because we were on the streets and
there are no people around us but now there now that we are into the
small and we are there are people around us it's
our responsibility to put on the mask so here is our meal for today
he started hogging also i'll show you what
this is this is potato hash brown this is turkish bali these are two type
of salads it's a cucumber salad and cabbage salad
and these are french beans they're boiled this is
red cabbage beetroot these are the type of salad
and this is pierogi this is the mayo sauce
and this is cream and mushroom sauce and mushroom with sour cream
okay and this is i think this is salsa sauce and
rice of course and this is berries with ice cream
so i will this is all for my plate and he's having some chicken fried chicken
and other stuff let me just dig in right
away okay so now we are done having food and
this is cara for behind me it's quite huge but uh now that we
uh live here we live here since uh year and a half now we know what things
are placed where so it becomes very easy for us to
find but uh yes initially it was a
task for us to find stuffs because we didn't really know
which things are placed where and moreover uh
not all brands write the name of the specific stuff inside in english
the name is written in polish language so then you have to convert it and then
get to know whether it's what exactly is inside the stuff so we first begin with the frozen stuff
yeah so no take this one one or two
take two yes and yes you mostly have a lot of stuff in
this freezer which is ready to eat also you just have to
microwave it and have it uh not those one
take these two these yes this this okay how much two yes not that one this yes
stay tuned and this is the meat section this is
basically the sausages section and that's the ready meat that you get
and this side is the bakery section you have all types of
breads here i am not going to take this one you have
ready pizzas a lot of type or types of breads that
you get here the multigrain one a whole wheat one the vegetable section is on the other
side which we will be going in some time uh
it seems there is no i think this is a whole wheat bread right no this is not wheat bread i don't know so see now you know what what the
problem is there are so much variety of everything here
and not everything is written in english this is
the meat section here that's the that side is the fish section
this is the meat one i'm sorry if you guys
don't like to watch this but uh yes that's the that side is the fresh
chicken or i mean the fresh meat that you get there
and this is the frozen one we generally take this one
we haven't tried the one from the butchers
the fish section you get marinated fish as well 350 grams 350 grams 350 grams just to make sure we are showing him 350
grams because not everyone you just put 250 grams and
we need 350. so on this side you have all
there are marinated fish here also and there are types of
spreads and there are salads as well there are this juices here
a lot of packed stuff and i generally don't prefer having pack
food so i will buy everything as much as i can
get in the fresh section so this is where you weight all
the vegetables okay is oh okay i'm just checking if everything is
built properly or not now i need to take butter come take two no we already have one okay
so strawberries and different types of berries
are very famous in poland so if you are here anytime and if you see berries
around do try them they are really very sweet
and very tasty and maybe you can just have them with
the whipped cream or vanilla ice cream it tastes really very
good and you behind me you can see it's the
freezer and the hell lot of type of
butter there's cheese there are plenty variety of
cheeses here and the egg section is here
pro egg max egg light egg light egg pro egg mash
no it's we're just kidding it's all the same i mean it's not the same
but different brands they're different brands and
it now it's time to show people's favorite section in the supermarket this is basically the beer section there
are multiple type of beers here you get there are a lot of type of beers you get
i'll just turn my camera around so many times the next lane that you have here is for hard drinks
and alcohol is quite cheap in poland so so that's the other side of
this lane was for beers this section is for
whiskey scotch and far over there you can see
this vodka and this lane is for wine so i'll
i'll just take you guys around i am showing you what the prices are
here you can just converted on using google
it's very cheap compared to even our airport yes
more than the duty free also right yes and this side is the white
white alcohol like gin and martinis and stuff
mostly all of these so basically poland is
very famous for their vodka and yes so this is one of the famous uh
vodka here this is another one famous one famous in
poland and this is but the most uh famous one is this one
zubrufska and there are so many flavors in
zubroska so you can imagine they're actually alcohol bottles quite strong i've heard it from my
friends the box is so fancy oh this potato would drive us so basically
the polish vodka is also made out of potatoes
so there are no specific wine shops here like we have in india
all the supermarkets have these sections in them so
yes and you need to be 18 plus to buy alcohol they will ask you for
your identity proof as in the age group the wines are displayed in with their
manufacturing country where it is made from but the most expensive alcohol in
sections here the hard drink sections it was the one made in india
it's called amrit last time when i had seen here
the box was there but not sure if it is there now
no that's that that was the one most expensive alcohol in this
full uh lane there's a museum for polish vodka all
together so i hope i will be able to visit there
once while my stay in poland and yes
i want to see how how and what exactly do they have in this museum i'm very
curious to know yes these are local polish chocolates
this one is my favorite and it's the special chocolate
from poland i don't know how you pronounce this krufka masala it's
very tasty i generally send this home for my parents so now that we are almost
done with our shopping we have bought a lot of stuff and it's gonna be
too heavy for us to carry and uh go home vlog at the same time so i
will just stop here and let's catch up once we reach home so
we have just reached home and we both were carrying two bags each and
yes this is it guys i hope you have enjoyed this one and
you found it informative as well if you have any questions do comment down below
i will make sure to answer them and hit the subscribe button and hit the
bell icon if you haven't done it yet it's for free so please do it uh
we put in a lot of efforts to do this and
yes i will see you guys in the next one until then you guys take care bye bye
stay safe|||hello how are you folks? so we are here on the road for a long long drive to Poland yes we're on a land trip from England to Poland I took this vlog to share to you guys how its like to cross the borders of UK  to Europe via eurotunnel. my child is coughing Eurotunnel is an underwater railway tunnel  that connects Folkestone, England with Pas-de-Calais, France According to information it is the only fixed link between the island of Great Britain  and the European mainland. And now were are here in  Leshuttle terminal. Prior to getting here,  first arrange your relevant travel documents  like passport, visa... whichever is needed.  As for me with a Philippine passport, I have yet to get my visa approved  before booking a ticket here in leshuttle. So this trip has been planned  a few months ago. There are types of tickets (to choose from)  when you book a ticket in their website. There are 3 types. The one we took can be refundable and the date of trip  can be moveable in case we don't make it as planned. But the closest date to your intended travel you book,  the least chance of changing and refunding it in case you don't make it. So upon booking your ticket,  you'll be asked what type of vehicle you are driving  and your passengers' information. Make sure all passengers in your car  have the necessary travel documents. Upon arriving here in the terminal, proceed to check-in. Just like what we do in the airport (prior boarding a plane). Check-in at least 1 hour before your  scheduled departure time.  You'll be given a hanger letter for your boarding. Just follow the led directions  leading to where to go next. Now we passed through the border controls. In the border control,  they checked our passports, how many people are in our vehicle they asked to open the windows even check your baggage if you have. They also did a surface test in the steering wheel. This is a test done whether to.. whether the driver is in use of  some substance  and they asked us to open the trunk. Then after checking,  go on driving to the boarding platform  which is now the train.  And now we are inside the train. There you hear the announcement  about safety precautions etc.  It doesn't feel like its moving though. The trip takes about 35 minutes For 35 minutes, we are in the tunnel. We are now in France!|||yo what's up guys today we are reacting to
Eurovision Junior version of Eurovision this is Laura or Lara to the Moon she's from Poland
so chest yakshamash if you guys are new to the channel don't forget to like And subscribe
don't forget that if you want an exclusive request you can send it on coffee and let's
go Lara to the Moon Holland [Music] you lost your breath Your Heart Is Made she
looks like a young danielia to lecheva eight nine years old [Music] [Music] I think you're ready [Music] [Music] I like how they mixed English with Polish
[Music] that's a trend nowadays mixing English with the local language right just to get
International um Appeals [Music] foreign kind of sounds like um stranger things [Music]
[Applause] [Music] kind of like a motivational message
[Music] [ __ ] wow that lasts that last um note was very very good wow okay so here
are my thoughts her voice is developing but she does have a very strong very potent voice
and I like the fact that she is um you know she's already got the attitude she looks a
little bit shy but she still looks confident and that's nice and I like the message of
the song it's pretty inspirational and yeah to the Moon it is do you guys think Poland
is gonna win let me know in the comments down below if you're from Poland then thank you
for watching leave a comment if you're not from Poland let me know where you're watching
from don't forget guys like And subscribe and let me know who the winner should be according
to you okay so coffee if you want an exclusive request see you soon take care bye|||okay [Music] eight zloty 8.8 is sloppy [Music] hello not bad air conditioning hello my little friend we all know what this is what is this a tiny peepee big peepee tiny peepee a big peepee remember the toilet little pot small pot [Music] so how to get to the right spot you go to google maps yeah and you check what bus you need to take well we are at the spot so this is the spot and then you go to the machine that says tickets aka biletti 20 minutes thing yeah did you have like three options yeah 20 minutes 75 to 90 or short term we're gonna take 20 minutes [Music] lucca [Music] so we arrived at the palace culturinoki cultural palace of show it's pretty big and we're gonna try to get up all the way up there is that right yes exact them off yes girl so he paid 35 zloty for both of us that's like eight euros and now we're going up the elevator bye-bye [Applause] oh whoa that's right oh [Music] so you paid two euros 30. for two hot dogs in the weekend you get one you buy one and get one for free and now we're gonna try it that will do it's not bad it's not great either [Music] so we arrived at clar right right we're gonna do the polish tasting seems to be vodka how do you feel about tasting all the vodka yay nice [Music] [Music] [Music] okay [Music] oh some hot water into each of the bowls please do not temperature or that other conditions but very small and then you make pinches with i would like you to compare this [Music] you|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||[Music] we invite you to join our chat and today we talk about a culture sh that I fed in two years in Poland yeah you've been here for a long time actually I visited my culture shock in Poland like first um as I made the video like people don't use the umbrella oh yeah on rainy days like it got kind of viral like so many people actually like saw the video yes so why why don't you use umbrella why don't I use umbrella like I I usually do use umbrella but I only use when it's actually raining because when it's mafka when it's like driz I learn I learn now you know you now you learned new word yes I learn the new word MAA mafka mafka yeah yeah yeah mka mka it's like when it's like drizzling so it's like when the when it's like little rain I think we Polish people we don't actually open The Umbrellas so no umbrella on ma yeah because if you open your umbrella it's you already get wet and then you have to like carry it everywhere like when it's wet I know but I don't want to be wet uh rather than the umbrella is w I think for us it's like it doesn't really matter M I think for us it's better to just like we getting we getting wet than the umbrella because then you have to put your umbrella for example in your I don't know back or something and it's wet and everything is wet ah also I found that like in Japan there is always a umbrella stand whenever we go and in Poland you don't have it yeah so you don't have any place to put your umbrella when you go inside building you know yeah and we prob don't have it so we have to carry the umbrella everywhere why you don't want to carry and you don't use umbrella it's unnecessary to carry like wet [Music] umbrella makes sense okay yeah and also I feel like people do like rainy days yeah I think so I think there's like a Vibe when it's like raining it's nice to like just walk and it's like raining a uh also when it comes to working for me it feels kind of weird When My Friends Ask me to go out for a walk because I've never had this experience in Japan with my Japanese friends really like if we hang out it's always for Cafe for lunch dinner uh for karoke you know so there was no option about walking but here I think walking is like popular I think like we could just like I just like oh do you want to go for a walk and we would just like go for a walk and not actually like go anywhere like in general in Japan it it's not a purpose oh it wouldn't be a purpose of going out I think we just like walking in Poland yeah I see many people along the river when it's like really sad like in summer like you could see so many people like walking by V and just like walking you were going also like you were going for a date they would go for a walk is it like popular in Japan no way a so in Poland I think it's like normal just to go for like when you like before going like like some place coffee shop you could just go for a walk or after I think it's like kind of popular here yeah not in Japan you don't go for walks no we don't go for a walk oh that's only for dogs that's funny like because this is another culture difference yeah here we really like walking and also it's like always funny because when I'm walking with like anyone like not polish they always tell me that I walk too fast yes and I think it's also like a Polish thing like we walking so fast yeah many of my friend polish friends walk so fast I need to hurry up to catch up why do you walk so fast all of my all of my you're in hurry it's like for me it's like I like walking really fast because walking slowly is for me waste of time but you like walking that's why I like walking I like walking you like walking fast but you like walking and you said you are thinking that walking is waste of time I know I it's like just like are you like walking fast it's just like it's a thing yeah but all of my foreign friends they always tell me mother why you walking so fast especially you are very fast yeah maybe you will win in the competition so in Poland people take shoes off inside like someone's Place yeah but thing I don't understand is that when I went to a party some people were in their shoes and some people were not okay I don't understand it either oh you so I was like what should I do and because some people are in their shoes or some are not and I don't want to take them off when someone I always take them off when I'm in someone's house because I I think like if people came to my house and they would like like they were wearing like boots for example and it's like wet or like I don't know dirty I would be mad so I always take off my shoes uhhuh yeah I kept wearing them because I didn't want to take them off when someone's are in shoes ah I don't know I always just take them off so that was confusing but sometimes it's better just keep your shoes at parties sometimes it's better just like keep wearing shoes at parties because it's like always like alcohol somewh that's true that's always a mess part oh when I had a party at my place yeah on Halloween last year oh yeah yeah I let people wear shoes mhm on mhm and it was disaster after I told you it's better just to take them off yeah it was a disaster and I learned from the experience and then on New Year's party I told people to take them take the shoes off yeah that makes sense in Japan some restaurants require you to take the shoes off oh so you should be aware that uh your socks don't have um holes because sometimes I do yeah I think sometimes everyone has yeah so in Poland we don't have we don't have to yeah like we don't have to take off our shs when going to a restaurant yeah I've never seen it never happened to me before that will be something interesting actually to take off your shoes this is Japanese restaurant you should haveand in Poland yes you and I was like what why do Japanese people don't hug I think it's [Music] impossible|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Today is a day of blood and glory, Let it be a day of resurrection! Gazing at France’s rainbow, The White Eagle launches into flight. Inspired by the sun of July, He calls to us from above: "Arise, oh Poland, break your chains, Today is a day of your victory or death!" Hey, whoever is a Pole, to your bayonettes! Live, freedom, oh Poland, live! Let this worthy battle cry Sound forth to our foes! Sound forth to our foes! Rattle, drums, roar, guns, On! Children, form a deep line; Freedom and Glory lead the regiments Triumph shines on spearheads. Fly, our eagle, in high flight, Serve the glory, Poland, and the world! He who survives will be free, He who dies is already free! Hey, whoever is a Pole, to your bayonettes! Live, freedom, oh Poland, live! Let this worthy battle cry: Sound forth to our foes! Sound forth to our foes!|||You have possibility to avoid work permit If you want to know what I am talking about  watch till the end of the video music ... music ... music ... music ...                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||I also have faith that things are going 
to be just fine. -Are you happy now? 
-Yes. Christina is half Mexican 
half American who decided to quit everything in the States and 
move to another part of the world I came with this backpack. And that's it. First thing he opens the door... He has... just boxers, I mean, thank God he had something We are now going to this famous church ZOE. They were really kind. They gave me a lot 
of things, more than I asked for to be honest, because I really just wanted some basic stuff. Oh my God, Jesus please, give me a job
anywhere right here in those buildings. I got the job, 
within a month I was already working here|||hi Travelers and Welcome to our channel the travel boss do you want to know the best thing to do in creco keep watching this video till the end Krakow is a great place that has something for everyone whether you're in Krakow with your lover your whole family or on your own you're sure to find a lot to do that will keep you busy and make for a great vacation but before we start the top please subscribe to our channel the travel boss and let us know if you want to go here by leaving the thumbs up number 10. zakazuk this is without a doubt one of the most beautiful spots in all of creco a real treasure just outside the city center saksok is without a doubt one of the most interesting places in Krakow Salu which is made up of two reservoirs was made in 1991 when the old Limestone Quarry was filled with water number nine the Museum of Aviation all of the machines in the museum will have made your children there are a lot of interactive and multimedia features that make the visit really stand out a child can really learn about the world of planes and trust us it's a great time for everyone not just kids who like technology polish aviation museum has a large collection that is shown not only inside the main building and in Old airplane hangars but also outside number eight walk through the boulevards of creco take your special someone on a walk through krakow's Charming boulevards where you can see a breathtaking view of the city share some cotton candy and look at the lit upper neck of Footbridge you can also take care of your own feelings just hang a padlock and throw the key into the Vistula River number seven casimirs a walk through crico's most Charming neighborhood the Jewish casimirs is another great thing for couples to do the area is one of the best things to see in the city it has a network of narrow cobblestone streets with a lot of artisan shops selling one-of-a-kind gifts and cozy cafes where you can try Fine Wines and other Specialties to make your time even more memorable the Charming Vibe of the neighborhood and the culture of the Yiddish people make for a very romantic time in creco number six visit the Botanical Garden walk around the jajalonian University Botanical Garden this Garden was built in the 18th century and is close to the Old Town it is almost 10 hectares square and has thousands of beautiful plants in Krakow you have to go to the Botanical Garden if you want to take a break and relax Among The Greenery number five book a trip to the willichka Salt Mine everyone should go to the willitch basalt mine which is just outside of Krakow and has underground art and architecture made of salt that you will never forget since 1978 the wheelich assault mine has been on the UNESCO world heritage list it is without a doubt one of Poland's most important landmarks tourists can choose from a number of ways to see the sites number four Auschwitz birkenau Museum another must-see is the Auschwitz concentration camp which was used by the Nazis when they ruled Poland it was an important part of the history of the Second World War and going there is a way to remember the many people who died during the Nazi regime visitors can see a lot of real things at the Auschwitz birkenov Museum the former concentration camp has more than 150 buildings and about 300 ruins the fences ramps and roads are also original number three Oscar Schindler's Factory the museum in Oscar Schindler's Factory will be a lot of fun for people who like to learn about history you can learn more about Schindler's bravery by going to his office which has been kept in good shape the Oscar Schindler enamel Factory museum has a show about the time when the Nazis controlled creco from 1939 to 1945. not only does the exhibit show the history of the city but it also tells the stories of its people both poles and Jews number two main Market Square everyone who goes to Krakow eventually ends up on the main Market Square the wooden altar by vetsdos which is in Street Mary's Basilica is one of the most famous works of art from the Middle Ages one of the most important places to visit in Krakow is the main Market Square where Street Mary's Church is just one of many things to see there is also a multimedia exhibition underground that is worth seeing number one waddle castle and Cathedral don't miss seeing the beautiful cathedral and castle of wall this complex is the best place to learn about polish history it is set on a beautiful Hill one of the best things to see in Krakow is the wall royal castle which is impressive from the outside and the inside inside there are 71 exhibition halls with a total of tens of thousands of valuable items there are many paintings famous tapestries pieces of furniture military Collections and archaeological finds from wall Hill among other things there are our top 10 best things to do in Krakow do you have some other recommendations to visit in this beautiful city share your views in the comments section below and don't forget to subscribe to our channel the travel boss thanks for watching|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||welcome to the world of Travel and Adventure are you ready to explore one of Europe's hidden gems Poland a land of breathtaking Landscapes Rich history and a warm and friendly people who will make you feel right at home whether you're an art lover a history buff or simply looking to escape the hustle and bustle of everyday life Poland has something for everyone and today we're counting down the top 10 cities that you simply must visit during your trip to this incredible country so grab a notepad and get ready to plan your dream vacation at number 10 we have the Charming and historic city of the dance situated on the Baltic Coast gedansk is known for its stunning Old Town Complete with cobblestone streets colorful buildings and an impressive 13th century gothic church take a stroll along the longest brick pier in Europe or visit the European solidarity Center to learn about the history of the solidarity movement and its role in the fall of communism at number nine we have the bustling and vibrant city of bratzlaff this city is often referred to as the avenis of Poland due to its numerous Bridges and beautiful canals take a boat tour of the city or visit the impressive rothsloff Market Square complete with colorful buildings and an impressive Town Hall at number eight we have the picturesque and Point City of casimir's dalney located on the banks of the Vistula river casimir's dalney is a small town with a big heart take a stroll along the picturesque cobblestone streets or visit the impressive castle ruins which offer panoramic views of the surrounding Countryside at number 7 we have the historic and beautiful city of Krakow known as the cultural capital of Poland Krakow is home to a wealth of history and culture visit the Wawa Castle the former Royal Palace of Polish Kings or the stunning Saint Mary's Basilica known for its incredible wooden Altarpiece at number six we have the Charming and beautiful city of Lublin a city with a rich cultural heritage Lublin is known for its impressive castle and Old Town Complete with beautiful buildings and an impressive Market Square take a stroll along the picturesque cobblestone streets or visit the impressive majdinet concentration camp which serves as a sobering reminder of the atrocities of World War II at number five we have the Charming and historic city of poznan known for its vibrant Market Square and impressive town hall posnan is a city rich in history and culture take a stroll along the picturesque streets or visit the impressive St John's Cathedral known for its beautiful stained glass windows and for those interested in history be sure to visit the Museum of the first PS which explores the history of Poland's first dynasty at number four we have the bustling and vibrant city of chessing situated on the shores of the Baltic Sea chassin is a city known for its stunning architecture and Rich cultural heritage take a stroll along the picturesque streets or visit the impressive National Museum which explores the history and culture of the region at number three we have the Charming and historic city of tauren known for its impressive old town and beautiful cobblestone streets torrent is a city that truly captures the spirit of Poland take a stroll along the picturesque streets or visit the impressive Nicolas Copernicus Museum which explores the life and work of this famous astronomer at number two we have the bustling and vibrant city of Warsaw Poland's capital and largest city Warsaw is a city of contrasts with a rich cultural heritage and a thriving Contemporary Art scene take a stroll along the picturesque Old Town or visit the impressive royal castle which serves as a testament to the city's Rich history and finally at number one we have the Charming and historic city of zacapane located in the heart of the tatra mountains sakapane is a city that truly captures the spirit of Poland take a stroll along the picturesque streets or visit the impressive tatra Museum which explores the history and culture of this beautiful region and for those interested in outdoor activities be sure to check out the many hiking and skiing opportunities that sakopane has to offer and that concludes our list of the top 10 cities to visit in Poland whether you're an art lover a history buff or simply looking to escape the hustle and bustle of everyday life Poland has something for everyone so what are you waiting for pack your bags and start exploring this incredible country today thanks for watching [Music]|||yo what's going on guys my name is MI from Poland I'm here with Chris AKA Rudy Rudy he's from the UK and today we're going to be reacting to Falk okay so what does that mean my flipflop fell off um so it means 120 verses to take what's yours essentially with a okay in a in a slangy way produced by little Santiago as well um all right so this so so we've had a look at this one and it seems to be some kind of response to an initial this on him by was it w y K viick vck do we know this guy is this vck guy big no no we've had a brief look at the video it sound a little bit bouncy and it had it had a beat but um I don't think the guy had much capability but anyway um let's I just dissed him thiss from me already no come for us anyway let's get straight into this one and see what oh by the way yeah we know we're late to this yes we know we're late we know late we don't care we're two weeks late and what you going to do about it we was on holidays and other things and yeah ask your mom let's [Music] go he's beating [Music] up I knew he was going to rhyme with Instagram I just knew it he's got good flow though I feel like it's going to be very samey throughout the whole thing yeah yeah he's just talking stuff this verse is huge I think we need to cut it a little bit so where did we get to Instagram Instagram here all right let's go for a bit so where's our chat gbt our friend chat gbt there is a bit of a mi Miss look I'm not going to like try to correct you on this there's too many lyrics um just kind of go through it hopefully chat yeah there is a little bit of a Mis lyric up here at the start with this my CD can go to hell it's actually as Mi he explained to me it's like a it's kind of a slang kind of thing where he basically means my CD was done without much effort or he did he didn't have to put in that much effort to do his CD kind of thing um like a late night pizza your sweating at yours but but whose is more intense CD was supposed to drop in May but here we are at the end of July if Love's real it'll wait sorry I was chasing after hose what's up Johnny you nailed the flow with chips when money calls me the cash sh is like a pixel there's Casher it should be like Pixar Pixar what's a Pixar Pixar oh the the movie thing okay uh there's Kasha via vixar pix Pixar damn on Sundays he's fooling around mama had dinner at her friends if she knew what's up she wouldn't be jumping around like a goat if she keeps jumping well screw her ass four lines are enough for me a minute is all it takes and then a rap battle with her three hold on a kiss the whole country hates pis the whole country hates Tusk do you know what those are yeah p is the governmentus is tus one of the Don's bro okay um young one earned that money president whatever you want to call it okay even if you have to steal it so you won't be a Broast like all my haters good luck brother believe me money brings happiness but back to it I lost my way again there's about 20 verses to take what's yours this is the third part and I don't know how many hour record today your as is spamming Instagram again at the hotel with that whole Maxon ofagra is that what we got to or you you say Instagram again somewhere else no yeah yeah that's where we got to all right so he's he's going where's the Instagram bit am I blind oh it was it yeah yeah yeah okay um so yeah it seems like he's going in on this guy it seems like when he says the album is he talking like is this w y andk game maybe involved in the his album or something in release of his album Maybe production or something maybe they were friends before or something yeah it could it could have I mean guys let us know is this guy CU from what I read here it seems like maybe he was involved with the producing of some of the songs or something like that and something went wrong and maybe they're beefing now possibly possibly yeah all right let's continue [Music] when I walk through the [Music] all right let's cut it again cuz cut it we got it where did we get to yeah just yeah yeah all right let's go back to the English now so let's go from where Instagram said where's that here all right do we know what he means when he says do you know what that is in English oh Finn and Jake we look at Finn and Jake yeah all right so he says grown men are still hating buckets hitting buckets somewhere I have a buddy who always be quicking something like Pascal he's damn shot but the principal kicked him out maybe it's not the underground anymore screw it what's the truth still the same won't make a track with just anyone even if he's bigger when it comes to Trends you knock your teeth out on such a beat I can cut versus go off the top I'll sit here and right all night doesn't matter how I do it I'll play it live right away no cat scares me nimble like Mickey Mouse she thought she'd stay in the room [ __ ] Rouse your CW is snakes like the dude who used to do the bounce I don't care about anything when I walk through the town every guy I know is a brute a boore grown men are ashamed to make money more shameful than living with Mama at 40 damn I think I'm losing it instant hits means V faly and Santiago almost said Vicki again um nikasa isasa when the budy comes in but the doors closed for [ __ ] when when rap money runs out I'll earn something again even if it's through Tomatoes I have an idea for profit my head is closed don't try to open it you five grand in profit you're acting like a star give you it ARR kid inhale exhale drink some water the body overdid it burnt his wires Finn and Jake those [ __ ] want an adventure sure okay we understand most of that right yeah I guess so I think he's just I don't see much like he's biger himself F but I don't see much as like a diss to diss to the other person do you what I mean I don't know if he's do you see that no but he is he is um oh Oh you mean I guess with the mom at 40 stuff and the and and the being gas of a 5k I suppose and stuff like that no yeah he is dissing him he's dissing him but apparently this was written in a few hours as well like straight after other one or something that's like right after the other person did his one yeah okay well I mean it's good though I did like the flow change though I just like when people diss each other guys here for the drama I'm just here for the drama I don't care um let's go down here yeah and then we'll do the rest of this verse there's still a bunch left of this verse all right let's go fo [Music] oh oh he's moved on to a different verse let's let's chill let's ch sure let's finish off that one there a lot of slang in there so guys the translation is going to be a bit crazy and a lot of flow change I haven't got all day for that I think he just switched up the beat again um he did all right so let's do the last bit of this first verse some of it even in Polish guys I don't even understand because of the slang these days like I I don't live there anymore I don't understand some of this stuff I'm old um want to know how those live watch my Vlogs [ __ ] top shoes you're getting into into my life three hours ago I was supposed to finish the session it's the it's the first quarter passed the young one is texting me on the plane write as much as you want this is how much I Live Now tell me how can I not be grateful what This is How I Live Now just put an extra word in there um but by the young one does he mean the guy on the diss track saying you say whatever you want or is he saying um I don't know is there it doesn't seem that there's there's there's a thing for that I mean it could be talking about him I don't know who he means by the young one guys if you know let us know um tell me no no it sounds like he's just say he's just chatting about some girl that's just texting him tell me how how can I not be grateful as hell for doing things without a damn break weed on the table chemicals on the table everything's on the table what does this girl want even my grandma says leave them do what you have to do it's not worth your health I don't feel like sending messages like that pazzy knows waiting for voicemails yeah so it seems like he's talking about just like even his grandma's telling him to not talk to these baba baba NOS um and everyone here [ __ ] Up's mental illness is piling up like like La pox when Santiago drops the base he'll knock your airpods out I'll never portray myself as a gangster because I have no bases on Tik Tok they talk some [ __ ] about me damn corks Tech fleece from a buddy and stolen Jordans on oh new money new contact lavid Loca [ __ ] that's how that's how it looks I around the dick Novelties on the website you you I just ate and I'm holding as Li again I don't even know which verse this is but I really want to keep rapping damn htio it should have been longer too bad you sent such a short break uh such a short beat is that all of it no so where's the second verse guess I add that sorry technical technical difficulties guess we'll add this can you translate this for me yeah hell yeah live translation live translation let's go um all we can keep listening I guess yeah yeah we'll keep listening we'll do I'll try and do should we do the next verse Allin one or yeah let's just do all in one cuz it seems like he might be going in here all right let's go let's go let's go [Music] spe for let go imagine Santiago a [Music] lot is that everything yeah that's everything wow you didn't even want to listen to the last little bit oh man this gu Tak away 4 and a half minutes of My Life um more than that I've been reacting for 13 minutes mate yeah well I think it's a good it sounds good and to be fair from his lyrics it's good as well there's a lot of there's a lot of switches up he did kept going a bit deeper and deeper and deeper in terms of like there was more talking at the end yeah all right well let's see what he says so he says I'll extend this Dam she wanted to repay me for a drink in nature hundreds of go like that what do you want what do you want to charm me with um where's my culture I don't talk about culture with me the highest dollar B mamore I love having cash I didn't even I didn't give it up for the sake of coins one brosi is a herbalist other brosi is a doctor the ferdish Tropicana mixing polish rock with appar roll chubby you drinking what's up we pay for your we pay for drinks and you come back with a r with a round one that's a strike like a lucky I'm grabbing hay in my money in my hands like a like Sor in weeks Lucky Strike yeah yeah cigarettes yeah s thanks bro um Santiago throws a pair and and that puts you out I got it from the city nerves too fast I got it from my father it's a mess in the DNA a damn beer is enough for you for a [ __ ] a light tornado their zippers are open weak covering in your crew because on command a simple trick is enough [ __ ] I've climbed a league or two no one can tell me about anything anymore stick your leg out for me it's a little rain mom has no money you flushed it on your outfit they wanted to impo impose on me to be ashamed of my lyrics you CW behind me and I increase the distance the snakes cut themselves off what's up without greetings you bend down for pennies I reach for championships legs have bent you want to cut mine you nail two specifics waiting for them to devour you what's up and greetings I left her she was she hasn't swallowed yet I I'm barely home my loneliness is already catching up but I don't cry BQ cars in the garage I'm I'm greeting Poland again I drink more than bonson and it's better to greet even though I think it's better to say goodbye since no one around respects life I want to be like the elders anxiety and fears what it's just like so much going oh there's just so many lyrics Ro rogal Tau me talked to me about it and and when [ __ ] hits the fan turn it on and listen I took my mistakes to prayers and once I would have I wouldn't have lifted complexes still sprinting stick your leg out I won't stop in place still sprinting 120 falky Santiago let's go Jesus Christ you did not need to do this much well I some water now I I do agree now with what you said before now from some of these lyrics it doesn't seem like he's dissing him that much yeah a lot of talking about women throughout the whole thing as exactly is and grandma grandma got more of a mention than this guy did but I mean there's some obviously dissing and stuff like that but there's nothing too like he's not I feel like he hasn't like ripped into him where yeah that's what I'm saying like it doesn't seem like it's a response to the disc like very much like when we've listened to like UK dises and stuff and other other dises around the world there's always they always go deep they always find out some details that you don't know you're going into then you're being like Oh mad to come out with this crazy information and but but maybe the other guy didn't go that hard maybe the other guy casual yeah maybe it's just casual you do me I'll do you it still good though like I like to see this kind of stuff on the scene so fair play and especially if you responded like really quickly with 120 verses then fair and fair play yeah I mean what's your rating I'm going to go with a 7.5 yeah I think I think 7 7.5 is good for me as well um definitely good like the video I mean obviously if he's releasing it really quickly the video isn't going to be yeah topnotch there was a bit editing in there and stuff um the beat was kind of cool um obviously a lot going on a lot of text and yeah but not not enough about him I feel like not enough about the actual could have been a bit more deep but guys let let us know what you think let us know your rating for the song and what you think about it um in in the comments and as always guys s stuff like we'll see you in the next one peace peace|||The 2nd Polish Emperor, and the first from the Lubomirski dynasty - Władysław VII had three sons and a daughter. His third son, who was born after his death - Kazimierz Postumus had three wives one of which was Matilda Lancaster, from the British royal family. They had a daughter - Katherina who married king of France Louis the XIV and a son named George Lubomirski. Matilda’s brother, Emperor George the First married Władysław’s daughter Anna. They had a daughter Anne, who inherited the British throne when George the First died. Her son Frederick Augustus died at a young age, and when Anne the First also died, the British crown went to her cousin, George the Second Lubomirski. After that, he married Maria Lubomirska, granddaughter of Jan the Second, who was his uncle.  Together they had a son, August who was supposed to inherit both Empires.  George’s sister, Polish Katerina, queen-regent of France disagreed with August’s rights to the British throne  and fought over it against a Frenchman Charles de’Medici, Polish regent and father of Maria Lubomirska, August’s grandfather. Polish side won the War of Regents (1720-1722) and August became double Emperor in 1724. Right after ascending to the throne, he faced British revolt led by Matthew Norfolk, who refused to be ruled from Warsaw. August the First died two years later, leaving his infant son August, and wife, Anna Lubomirska from the Georgian branch of the family on the throne. Anna managed to hold both empires together for 14 years. She suppressed Norfolk’s uprising, then dealed with another one led by Octavius Rooke and completely abolished Slavery in both empires, before her son became fit to rule independently.  August the Second dreamed of creating his own colonial empire and bought rights to colonize cold and inhospitable Greenland, creating a second Polish colony after Senegal, that was taken from France in the War of Regents. After a bloody Three Years war with the HRE and Portugal, Polish vassal state - Rhein Union was created. In yet another war, Polish Commonwealth conquered vast territories of Mali and in 1759, duchy of Normandy, loyal Polish vassal since 1724,  joined it as well, giving Polish emperors a crucial territory to keep control over Britain. August the Second ruled for twenty-six years when he died at a young age of fourty-one. His son, Władysław the Eighth, amongst others, expanded Polish colonies in Africa, got new territories in North America, Carribean and Indonesia  and got Gibraltar ceded to the British crown for 50 years, a deal that was supposed to end in 1829. Amongst other feats, Władysław captured Berlin in three separate wars over four years, subjugated Sweden, resigned from being head of the Anglican church and crushed yet another British independence revolt.  During the rule of his successor, August the Third, British nobles demanded that Polish colonies in North America be annexed into British Seven Colonies August refused that, further expanding the divide between Warsaw and London.|||Imagine this:
You’re in the heat of one of the bloodiest battles of the biggest war known to the history
of mankind; The Battle of Monte Cassino, World War 2. Part of an artillery company, you rain fire
onto the enemy positions. There have been 3 other attempts to secure
these positions over the course of the past 5 months, all of which have proven very costly
and unsuccessful - you can’t afford to fail for a fourth time. And even though you’re doing your very best,
your allies on the frontline are requesting more and more artillery support in order for
them to make a breakthrough, but there’s only so much you can do - there’s only so
many men than can operate and reload the guns. And in a slight pause from all the chaos that’s
going on around, you glance into the distance and you can’t believe your eyes;
A literal 200 kilogram brown bear carrying an ammunition crate rushing to your aid. Following the Ribbentrop-Molotov pact in the
beginning of The Second World War, the Soviets declared that the Polish state, previously
invaded by Axis forces on 1 September 1939, no longer existed, effectively breaking off
any prior relations they had with Poland. Roughly 325,000 Polish citizens were taken
as prisoners of war by the Soviet authorities and were deported to work camps throughout
the Soviet Union. 2 years later in 1941 however, due to pressure
from both the British government and the Polish government in exile, which at the time was
based in London, and given the fact the Axis forces broke the non-aggression pact and invaded
the Soviet Union, the Soviets agreed to set most of the Polish prisoners free and let
them organise a military formation on Soviet soil, which would be later known by the informal
name of “Anders’ Army”, named after its commander “Władysław Anders“. The initial idea behind this army was to assist
the Soviet forces fighting against the Germans on the Eastern Front, where the Germans had
the upper hand. But the Soviets soon realised that this war
went downhill for them very fast and they barely had enough food rations to feed their
own troops, let alone the Polish forces. So in march of 1942, Joseph Stalin agreed
to evacuate the Poles to Iran where they would be put under the operational control of the
British government. It was here where the Polish troops were stopped
at a railway station in Hamadan, Iran while en route to join the British troops where
they encountered a young boy alongside a brown bear cub. Given the unusual sight, some of the soldiers
gathered around to see what was going on; They were informed that the bear’s mother
had recently been shot by hunters and that he was now an orphan, being cared for by the
boy. The soldiers took pity on the bear cub, because
it was very much like them, themselves having been left without a family or a home as well. They decided to bring the animal with them
and offered the boy some Persian coins, a chocolate bar, a swiss army knife and a can
of beef in exchange for the bear cub and the young boy accepted;
Ultimately changing the bear’s life forever, sending it into an adventure a bear could
only dream of. For the next three months the troops and the
bear were stationed in a refugee camp near Tehran;
They took care of the bear cub and treated it like a baby, feeding it condensed milk
from an old vodka bottle. A particular group of soldiers from the 22nd
Artillery Supply Company grew quite close to the bear and decided to name him “Wojtek”,
which means “Happy Warrior” and became the mascot of the company. Over the course of the next year, the troops
alongside the bear were stationed at multiple allied bases throughout the middle east and
soon enough Wojtek grew up and so did his appetite. He gave up the milk and the soldiers would
donate part of their rations to feed the ever growing animal;
He would eat anything ranging from fruit, marmalade, honey, syrup and even beer, which
became his favourite drink, when his bottle was empty he would sadly look through the
opening to see where the rest of the beer was, waiting for someone to take pity on him
and serve him another one. Besides drinking beer, Wojtek copied much
of the behaviour from the humans around him; He would drink coffee in the mornings and
enjoy the occasional cigarette, only accepting already lit ones and turning down the others,
where he would take a puff or two and then eat the rest of it. They taught Wojtek to salute and to march
in line staying on 2 feet, he would also enjoy wrestling with the soldiers, as he got even
bigger and stronger the soldiers would wrestle with him 2 or 3 at a time. The men even taught Wojtek how to pick up
new recruits and hold them upside by the boots to make the rookies think they were getting
eaten. But of course this was just for giggles, in
reality he was very docile and would often sleep cuddled up with the soldiers inside
the tents. Imagine the horror of being picked up by a bear
and then having the men around you laughing at you as you think you were gonna be eaten, probably a little bit disconcerting if you ask me. If nowadays, some of the stuff discussed
would be considered animal abuse, just remember that at this time they didn't even know that smoking
was a dangerous activity. Whilst constantly being relocated at various
camps, Wojtek made quite a reputation for himself. When the Poles moved to a large Allied military
camp in Iraq, Wojtek allegedly stole a clothesline of ladies’ underwear belonging to female
personnel stationed in the area. He also learned how to break into the communal
showers and turn on the shower on his own, which proved to be a problem because water
was a scarce resource in the middle eastern heat and it was rationed, which sometimes
led to shortages. Eventually the Polish troops arrived in Egypt,
where they were reassigned to fight alongside the British Eighth Army in the Italian Campaign. The British ships which were to carry the
Polish troops had very strict regulations which prohibited mascots and other pet animals
on board, but for the Poles, leaving Wojtek behind was not an option; To get around this restriction, Wojtek was
officially drafted in the Polish Army and listed as a private of the 22nd Artillery
Supply Company, with his very own paybook and serial number and off they sailed for
Italy. During the 4th battle of Monte Cassino, Wojtek
observed the soldiers rushing around conveying ammunition and he stepped in to help;
Wojtek helped his unit by carrying ammunition crates which would normally require 4 men
to do so, never dropping a single one of them! For his service in the battle of Monte Cassino,
Wojtek was promoted to the rank of Corporal and in recognition of his popularity, a depiction
of a bear carrying an artillery shell was adopted as the official emblem of the 22nd
Artillery Supply Company. With the war slowly coming to an end, the
problem of what was going to happen to Wojtek rose, as the Polish soldiers scattered around
the world, it wasn’t clear where the bear would live however. The Soldiers were afraid that if he were to
go back to Poland, the newly formed Soviet-Controlled government would adopt him as a symbol of
communism, which didn’t really sit right with an army formed up of former prisoners
of the Soviet Union. The best solution they thought of was to send
him to the UK, where he lived the rest of his days in the Edinburgh zoo where he became
somewhat of a local celebrity, often being visited by his old comrades, which, much to
the displeasure of the zookeepers, would often toss Wojtek beer bottles and lit cigarettes
and sometimes even jump in his exhibit to wrestle with him, just like in the old days. How all good things in life come to an end
eventually, Corporal Wojtek passed away in December of 1963, aged 21 in the Edinburgh
zoo, leaving behind the story of one of history’s bravest bears. He may never have stepped foot in Poland,
but he was as Polish as a bear could get, his legacy lives on to this day, statues depicting
Wojtek can be found in both Krakow, Poland as well as in Edinburgh. The Imperial War Museum and the Sikorski Museum
in London also have memorials. Thank you for watching this video! If you would like to hear more amazing animal
stories you can check out our video on Ubre Blanca, Fidel Castro’s genetically modified
cow. Don’t forget to like and subscribe to catch
us next time!|||poland has own anti-uav system 12.7 millimeters 
mg radar laser rangefinder at the end of 2021 the   polish air force tested an air defense system 
at its central range designed specifically to   counter small enemy uavs and micro drones it took 
polls about four years to develop such a system   the development of this system lasted from 2018 
to 2022. designers and engineers from the polish   university of military technology and zach lady 
mechanics and tarnov were involved in the work   that consists of a multi-barrel machine 
gun wklm caliber 12.7 millimeters   laser rangefinder optoelectronic station   radar with a range of detection of targets up to 
3.5 kilometers and the operator's control station this complex can operate in three modes 
manual control mode from the operator   semi-automatic mode and automatic mode in which 
the operator only issues a command to fire tests   have shown that this is the most effective way 
to destroy small enemy uavs using opto electronic   stations and thermal imagers the most effective 
was the shooting of drones in the automatic mode the poles anticipate that they will also be 
able to use this to destroy enemy manpower or to   destroy low-flying aircraft and enemy helicopters 
the polls also predict that this can be used not   only as a means of air defense but also as a 
means defense for warships thanks for watching you|||good good Roberts found racing pigeons James here now 
looking at the camera because I'm looking at   the road but got some exciting news I am 
on my way right now to pick up some birds   that my partner brought in 
and these birds are from Poland Poland pretty cool right 
so this is a shipment of birds from Greg Rockets love look at the 
birds but that's pretty cool right very exciting he's bringing in a bunch of birds 
from from this breeder at a stoplight now so many   of you are familiar with Mike gannis's famous 
bird Raven these um are from the same breeder   pretty cool definitely have miserable 
weather going on today foreign got the birds from Poland 11 of them all right I think I got everything I 
need got my vaccines here ready to go   vaccinate them give them some Ivermectin drops 
for external parasites then we'll put them over   into there and I'm also going to database each 
band number [Music] gotta keep Good Records folks alrighty foreign there we go nothing in that 
one oh here they are they're beauties beautiful right pulling one out all right process 
one or two see what we have next oh a black   I like blacks I always have [Music]   come on okay [Music] so I'm 
recording the band information then   giving them a shot of pmv and salmonella giving 
them a vitamin and give them some drops for lice [Music] cool looks more here we go [Music] let's see that's what I'm doing birds in the crate are the [ __ ] from Poland this little guy is yeah rescued broken 
wing bird he is so tame he's a sweetheart let him out of his crate and he comes over 
and he makes friends with these guys it uh okay so I am here with my partner abdiel   hello everyone and we're looking over these 
birds from Poland that he imported what do   you think so far oh I love them yeah Rockets 
you know Rockets they are Rockets yep Craig   rockets and we've gone through them all 
and they are outstanding really great birds that's one that we're looking at nice little 
hen basically I have to make a choice it's a   very difficult decision I'm trying to pare it down 
to maybe five birds and then the rest are going   to go to a different Loft okay so FDL I wanted 
to ask you how did you get into pigeons oh uh   since I was um about eight years old I used to uh 
to have them and so you can see what's inexpensive   to you know to breed them yeah that was a sport 
that we you know my brother my cousins everybody   had pigeons and something that we loved yeah since 
I was you know a little guy that's awesome and   you're originally from Cuba is that right and 
Pigeon Racing is pretty big in Cuba right oh   yeah huge yeah it's huge yeah everybody in the you 
know in the black had you know I love the little   sometimes that you have you know the resources to 
have a big loss but the the love you know pigeons   yeah that's awesome okay so that was when you 
were a kid you got into it so what made you   decide to get back into it as an adult oh because 
uh there's something that uh for almost almost 20   years without any pigeons yeah and then I got into 
it and for some reason we just started watching   YouTube channels and I started with your channel 
oh oh nice and I started watching and watching   and I got into it and something that I it's a 
passion that you have yeah that even if you don't   enjoy it for a long time it's there yeah that's 
so true now I am a couple of you know couple of   Partners yeah and we're sending to one of races 
and so far we're starting good yeah this is my   this was actually 2022 was my first year yeah and 
2023 and 2024 with the new rockets yeah it will   change the world you know yeah I I I'm sure 
of it yeah and you guys you did you had some   money winners this year with just a few birds that 
you yeah entered and so we did pretty good is it   pretty darn good honestly I am really grateful to 
you James yeah that you gave me an opportunity no   yeah believe it or not you gave me the opportunity 
to you know uh since I don't have a loft   I could uh you are helping me to you know breathe 
yeah and we are they're working you know working   to working hard yeah to bring some good pigeons 
and and pretty soon you know see what happens yeah   it's been really fun uh it has been just really 
exciting to to look over Birds you know that we   in different Bloodlines from different parts of 
the world and decide what we want to bring in and   and it's been fun to do that and fun to 
see how their youngsters do in the races   and yeah that was just the first year so well 
second year our first year was the Tucson triple   challenge exactly yes yep and we did good yeah out 
of two birds we did really well did I uh started   with that I think it was yeah what your birds 
yeah they're my birds and I said I don't want   to sell these but this is what I do if someone 
wants to pay to enter them into a one-loft race   and we'll we'll split the winnings if they 
win anything then I'll just give them to you   and that's what we did you reached out right away 
and you're like yeah I want to do that and that's   what started it all and we entered one on the 
final yeah and I think it was like two two places   to get a to be on the first drop right yeah it 
was like a minute and 30 seconds behind first   first in the Trap did really well 350 mile race 
and it did really well on the 300 mile race too   exactly yep 24th Place that was exciting yeah it 
was really exciting yeah it was fun to see so and   then we did it again with black gold races here 
so hopefully these Rockets are gonna do it for us beautiful bird so we're gonna go out and 
look at some of my birds and some of the   birds that uh abdiel brought in but hasn't seen 
we got Falco um Aztec turquoise Griffin several   yeah so let's go out and do that 404 bred by Johnny the Greek that bird 
flew really well in the blue bucket   and so abdiel and I were like oh we want 
that and plus it was out of uh one of um   John's birds that I had been you know 
eyeing for a long time the hen 2214. beautiful bird we got her paired up with 
cup of joe this year just like last year   really like the way their youngsters 
handled all right here we go Falco got some babies here they're recently 
hatched so we're gonna have abdiel   take a look at this guy right there's 
abdiel holding Falco for the first time what do you think so so yeah feisty feisty yep let's see his wing 11 flights 11 flights we're gonna 
check two of his youngsters right now   his first two this year and 
see if they have 11 flights so far he's passed that on to 50 of his 
offspring there he goes back into those   babies good job buddy so these youngsters down 
here are also out of Falco and cantadora hint   I had Djibouti Foster them so let's see let's 
take a look at this okay sweetheart hey sweetheart   there you go all right so we got some 
Yorkshires here let's go like this I would love to see these guys in a one-loft race all right let's take a look here oh it's a little guy hey little buddy let's see what we got here two four six eight 
ten eleven that one has eleven eleven yep   that's cool yep that's an 11 fighter oh good 
job little bud all right yep this one was born   several days after this one well not several 
days about two days so I was worried about it   or maybe it's this one this one feels a little 
bit smaller so it's this one all right let's see two four six hey ten eleven 
this remote size 11. cool we've gotten one out of every round so 
far so now we got two out of this round all right nice there you go 
okay it was not an easy decision   but I narrowed it down to a 
few pairs that's one of them yep oh yep so now I just gotta get uh a 
play set up for him in the Loft just that   little thing oh man I need to build new 
Loft I need more space I think everyone   who has pigeons knows exactly what I'm 
talking about do we ever have enough space   right well we're excited to try 
out these rockets abdiel and I   we've got this pair and I've got another 
pair in there and then another pair and   another crate we're going to move them 
into bigger individual breeding sections   tomorrow all right more soon if you watch this 
video and you are not subscribed please do so   show me some love thank you thank you we 
really appreciate everyone's support adios|||hi Potter welcome to Poland Simon thank you it's my first time in Eastern Europe is that how you say hi in Polish sometimes come on welcome travelers to the land of pierogi vodka and extremely complicated surnames here's my Survival Guide first tip make sure that you don't travel to Indonesia instead because the Polish flag is literally begging you to confuse it with others second learning polish history is like watching an episode of Breaking Bad fascinating and depressing at the same time although Poland has constantly been sandwiched by the great Powers around it the Polish people still managed to preserve their culture and their freedom Poland was established in 966 when the Polish Prince was baptized since then then nothing has changed we are still medievally religious by the way we also have malburg the biggest medieval castle in the world oh wow if I ever get famous then I will buy it no you just have to become a priest the Polish Church gets everything for free interesting wait what is Chopin doing here isn't he French of course he is not he is a Polish composer okay okay then let's just talk about food polish Cuisine is all about delicious dishes that make your waistline scream for Mercy give it to me we have pierogi kotlets are also and many more wow you guys know how to turn simple ingredients into calorie bombs yeah if you are on a diet forget about it just embrace the fact that your skinny jeans will never fit again that's why every polish Sebastian wears tracksuit [Music] yes who invented dumplings first Poland or China Poland of course but I thought that a Polish Bishop brought him from China in the 13th century just shut up and eat it's polish wow how do you say thank you in Polish okay [Music] the last thing you need to try is Polish vodka we drink it like water here in Poland but pace yourself why what happens if I don't then it's time for this Coppola [Music]|||Hey guys thanks for tuning into Amy's
Crypt. I am currently in the cutest little town in Poland known as Łagów, and
although this place is really beautiful and really peaceful it does have one
very haunted castle. Now this castle has been converted into a hotel, so of course
we're gonna go spend the night there. But, we have opted to spend the night in a
very special room. We will be spending the night in the torture dungeon. Alright
guys we are just on our way to the castle now but I just wanted to stop and
show you one of the two lakes here. Which is just behind me. It's just so nice here.
It wasn't easy for us to get here. We had to catch a train, hiked ten kilometers
and then unintentionally hitchhiked here. But it was definitely well worth the
travel because it's just beautiful. So you can actually just see the castle
on the other side of the lake. So it's just over there, we're gonna kind of
cut around. We'll cut around and go find it now. Alright guys so we have just made it to
the hotel which is inside Łagów Castle and it looks absolutely amazing. We've
just checked in and dropped all our bags off inside our torture room, which is
really, really cool. But we'll talk a little bit more about that later. For now,
I want to show you around the castle. I want to do some exploring. This place has
some awesome ghost stories that also extend throughout the town and the
nearby lakes. So I'm going to check all that out and I think it's going to be a
lot of fun! We're just going to enter inside the castle walls, which look
really awesome. This gate here. So just up here is the main tower, which
you can actually climb up. I don't know how to get up there yet,
but we are definitely gonna head up there soon. And there's some cool gated
windows on this side you can see on the tower as well. There's like a drop down the other side. So we're on one side of the castle and you
can see the beautiful lake behind me. There's also, I mean this wall down here
as well, which is the defensive wall around the castle and then on the other
side of that it looks like there's another ruin structure. So we might go
ahead and explore that area too. That might be really cool. So we're about to head
into the castle. Around one side of the castle. It also has a restaurant inside of
it and a function space so there's a lot of weddings by the looks of it here. It's
really beautiful and nicely presented inside. So we're just in one of the dining spaces and
it's so grand and beautifully decorated in here. It's just so nice, like this light fitting. There is another dining room here that looks a bit more medieval
themed and I prefer it, just looks really, really cool. We're kind of standing right above it now. Just behind me here is the function area for weddings and it's really, really pretty
and we'll go explore that in just a minute. So the area I'm in is this kind of long
corridors that wrap around the central courtyard and it's really cool. I'm
looking down into there. It's also where most of the hotel rooms sort of span off from, but not as well us. We are down the stairs because it's a little dungeon. There's some really sick armor and shields
up here. That's some really cool decoration. So just behind me is the main dining and
kind of function area and it's a really pretty space and it's awesome how
they've got these plants just kind of draped over every single wall. It's
really, really cool. So iI just found something really cool. Hey
Jarrad. Alright see ya. Get me out. So just made it to the outside of the
castle, we're gonna, we think that this is the way up the tower. Looks like it.
Let's go explore. This is a really creepy little room. So these are those barred off windows you
can see from the bottom of the tower. So I just found a really scary-looking
trapdoor. I don't know what it is or where it goes to. That looks really deep. Can you see
anything down there? I can't really, I can't see the bottom. That is scary.
Don't stand on it. Alright, gonna have to finish walking up the final staircase
to the top of the tower. There is another staircase. Imagine this is a dungeon. It's got a nice
view for a dungeon. Check this out. You can see the whole Lake. It's bigger
than I thought. You keep telling me it's the last stair case and
then there's more. I don't know. I feel like surely that was the last one. it's not safe to stand on the bit in the middle. It does seem odd, doesn't it? That's the flag pole. So I've made it to the top of the castle
and it's really cool. We are literally at the highest point in Łagów. So you
can just see the whole town. It is an amazing view. It's a really cool tower as
well. Alright guys. I found a room in the tower,
which is nice and quiet and a little bit creepy, so I feel like this is the
perfect spot to tell some of Łagów Castle's history and its ghost stories.
Okay so obviously we are in Łagów Castle and it is located in the
small Polish town of Łagów, which is pretty close to the Germany border. The
castle itself is surrounded by two very pretty Lakes and parts of the
castle are very old. The first mention of this place was back in 1299, though parts
of the castle have been remodeled and built onto in later centuries. So Łagów Castle has had various owners during its lifetime, it's been besieged
and taken over. Parts of it have been destroyed and then rebuilt. So it has a
quite an interesting history and it's really not surprising to me that this is
listed as a haunted place. So this leads us into our first ghost story, which is
one of lost love and is a little bit sad. During the 15th century a Polish Knight
actually claimed Łagów Castle for his own. And at first the townspeople really
liked him. He seemed like a really good guy, but after his wife died he took a
turn for the worse and became bitter. Later on his sister came to
live with him here in the castle. Legend has it that during a battle, this Polish
knight took an enemy prince prisoner, and kept him here at Łagów Castle in a
very dark, depressing dungeon. This prince then took to singing to kind
of brighten his own mood and just keep himself entertained and sane. Now this
prince actually had a really great singing voice and soon the townspeople
kind of caught on to this and they would all gather around the castle just
to hear him sing. It was almost like a performance for them. Pretty soon the
Polish Knight's sister heard this captured Prince's beautiful singing
voice and she felt compelled to bribe the guards at the dungeon just to meet
him. The two really hit it off and pretty soon she was visiting on a regular basis
and of course they fell in love. Sadly though, the Polish Knight's sister was
promised to another Knight from a neighboring community. And at their
wedding day the prince who was held prisoner, was brought up to sing at their
wedding. And he was angered by this he refused to sing, which led to his
execution. So the prince was beheaded and his body was thrown into the neighboring
lake. This was all witnessed by the sister who loved him so dearly. And
legend has it that she immediately died of a broken heart.
Even before her own marriage could be consummated. Since her death, many people here in town have claimed to see her ghost. She is commonly
seen wandering at the shores of the lake, where her beloved prince was
beheaded and his body thrown. She's also been seen all around town and
particularly wandering the halls of the castle. The murdered Prince is also said
to haunt the area and his voice and singing can supposedly still be heard
from the dungeon area. And don't forget guys, I'm spending the night in the
dungeon or torture room. So if you want to see my paranormal investigation and
overnight stay there, make sure to hit subscribe. My part 2 video should be out
very soon. So I do have one more ghost story that
particularly centers on the room that we are staying in tonight, which is the
torture dungeon and supposedly the most haunted room in this castle. So this
ghost is supposed to be of a former owner known as commander Andreas Von
Schlieben and he was first spotted in the bedroom in 1820. He supposedly appears to males staying in that bedroom, primarily in the summer and spring months. So I'm
really crossing my fingers and hoping that Jarrad can get a glimpse of him
tonight. How do you feel about that Jarrad? What!?! So yeah, that's just a cool little
ghost story about the room that we're staying in. There's a really cold breeze coming out of here. Wow there really is. I don't remember it
being this cold on the way up. Do you? Now that is interesting. It is freezing.
Let's go walk through it. Oh this staircase is so skinny. Maybe it's just the brick? Yeah, it feels warm in here. Walking right next to the castle, which
is this side, then we have a beautiful church on my other side. The lake is
behind me. We're gonna walk down there. That is where the imprisoned prince was
beheaded and where his body was thrown. We're gonna explore that area and
just go check it out. So I don't know what's with this rock. It seems like  it's a sculpture. it's like bits of the rock have fallen off and then
they thought Oh we'll just reattach them get some staples and just drill a bit
back on. But anyway we are in the lake-front now. The castle is up here behind me and
you can kind of see the fortified wall here, which was a defensive structure. A
little bit this way is that, it's kind of spooky looking ruin. Not really sure
what it is or even if it is a ruin, but I think I have a closer look because it
kind of looks like it goes under ground. And it's all barred off and its a bit spooky. oh my god it is freezing. Yeah, I can feel that cold draft coming out of there. Is this supposed to swing? Can you climb under? I can't really see anything let me try
and get my torch. What's in there? I can't see anything really.
It looks like an empty room full of trash. All right, so we're moving on from the
creepy door because we cannot squeeze in there. Look another window. That
certainly looks spooky. Put my torch on. You can't see anything down there hey.
Oh that's so creepy. Alright, just keep walking around. It's almost like a stage area as well on
top. Jarrad you can fit in here. I don't think so. Jarrad cam? Jarrad cam my a**. So we're just standing on the edge of
the lake on this little jetty or pier depending on where you're from. And this
was where the prince that was kept prisoner was beheaded and his body was
disposed of. So the ghost of his lover is supposed to be sighted along the banks
of the lake up here as well. So I think it's an interesting spot and it seems
lovely and nice now, but knowing that story is very interesting and a little
heartbreaking even. And the castle is literally just up there where we're
spending the night, so we might even come out to explore a bit later in the dark.
So if you want to see that subscribe. Because it's coming in part 2. I really love it here. It's 
super nice and I get a very total Camp Crystal Lake, Friday the 13th vibe
here as well. That's why I love it so much. That is so deep. Which has just spiked in the magnetic
reader. thank you guys so much for watching I
hope that you enjoyed this video. If you did, please remember to like, comment,
share and subscribe. I would love to know your thoughts on this haunted castle and
its ghost stories. If you are interested in watching my paranormal investigation
and overnight stay in the most haunted room at this castle ,which is also a
torture dungeon, then hit subscribe. Part two will be dropping very soon on my
channel. If you want to read any more information about this haunted location
or any other haunted locations head to amyscrypt.com and remember guys, until
next time, stay spooky!|||hello everyone today Pavel is doing a video with me where he quizzes me questions me about Poland thank you for today we have ten questions about Poland some of them are very hard and some of them are very easy because I up hair crease so much you can see here we go someone here my dignity doesn't exist anymore so he'll try to kill my dignity as well let's try to her dignity now tell me what they find meaning boys in Poland I'm up I'm so drunk good you're getting well played Poland is the world's biggest exporter of mushrooms wood furniture good good good the biggest mountain peak in Poland is something with there it starts with the red yesterday Jim Jim Jim is it wrong something short that starts with odd ok give me options then right now I need to think about options we are oh my god ok so you don't know anything I know kinda thing okay so maybe how the point maybe I'll give you like a second method delay you got second matter is quick yeah and is it the one syllable no reason ok I would okay but you have have a point if I think you know you just have something in your mind here oh yeah she knows a bit mm-hmm I'm using the co-pilot hmm what Carol whatever this is something historical political depart what the poet a poet okay at airport a president an actor not the Pope say it again the name cut off wait till have you ever heard or not no oh so you won't know the options are actor president and a poet yes and Pope it's not Pope president no no no is it poor yes did you have only one we have only one what this is not real name not real name is Ruby young papa they choose the other names out there this is trick question I could accept it okay okay how many letters does the polish alphabet have I made a video about polish language and I said this in this video you can come probably 28 but I will count Birds okay I'll count first like the letters that we both have aa bad joke that forget her say I don't know oh yeah they're so seventeen for now and then you have your special letters check share W jet jet well okay whatever I'll say 28 32 what am I missing oh oh yes what is the tradition that we perform at the beginning of spring at the end of the winter we do something like people are doing something going somewhere you've been on this one with you yes yeah okay in Polish this good okay good good you're very good you're very good Paul have border with Germany Czech Republic yeah check yeah Czechoslovakia Ukraine little one here missing on this side there is only Germany Czech Republic and Slovakia but I'm missing one yes sir do you mean one more under Oh Belarus we killed it I don't know how many points you got for like probably like 80% on them okay sorry I'm like 7 out of them but I'm eating your just show off but I know about Poland yeah thank you very much and that's all for today you look at her channel because she made another video as I mentioned before that's all for today subscribe follow Instagram leave the comment see you soon why|||Poland, with its resilient history and patriotic 
people stands on the cusp of a great future. Visual of a modern city skyline interspersed 
with stock footage of Polish industry  Poland boasts one of the fastest-growing economies 
in the European Union, seeing a consistent yearly   rise in both GDP and foreign investment.
Poland's sense of national pride and strong   community bonds drives forward political stability 
and unity. The country has set its eyes on   becoming the leader of central Europe by 2030.
Poland produces some of the brightest minds,   with universities that not only equip graduates 
with cutting-edge knowledge and skills,   but also instill strong ethics and values, 
keeping the spirit of patriotism alive, Poland takes pride in its 
cultural and social life,   enriched by a heritage spanning centuries. 
This commitment to the arts and creativity   is reflected in Poland's significant 
record in cinema, music, and business."  Poland is rapidly modernizing and upgrading 
its infrastructure, expanding airports,   railroads and ports; making it a hub of commerce 
and trade in the region. By 2030, this phenomenal   growth is expected to continue, asserting 
Poland's position as a regional superpower.|||what is very cooperative would like to invite you to taste a dish made with the use of blueberries we have two amazing chefs here with us Miho truck Iowa and Nicholas ray both laugh Polish cuisine welcome to the world's most healthy trade fair we are about to show you that Polish cuisine is changing it is still tasty but even more light and healthy so what's happening is that basically chefs are learning very fast they're discovering their own Polish local products and of course their producers that's when the turning point takes place they acquire a better understanding of the products its tastes and the techniques and the methods to work with it therefore chef's produce tastier lighter and healthier cuisine Polish cuisine becomes lighter this is the big trend in Poland and this is the right direction to follow Misha to consult a judge about Raja valid dunya words there's no gravity to the ethically false cases the Dalek Caan she's beautiful she's cocky no it not be insulted not very productive super methodology Joey Charlie Polsky cookie blueberries right now or a real postcard of Poland they build up the brand parts cosmic Ouya in fantastic style worldwide they're produced by passionate people poland's climate is ideal to obtain the right balance of sweetness and sourness hot summers and cold winters with strong negative temperatures it gives pause blueberries their unique flavor many say they're the very best in the world blueberries are an absolutely hit of Polish export we grow them of acid soil in cooperation with nature we take them by hand what's most important with pre-cool the Bluebirds according to a revolutionary standard within 30 minutes from picking that way we can lock the flavour and the freshness of the fruit that's why we're able to export our products or bloomers to 30 countries on four continents very good you|||Poland is one of the most racist Nations on the 
planet the Polish people despise black people   despise them hate them welcome to candid Africa 
truthful Unapologetic and um when the Russians   went into Kiev there were a lot of African African 
students studying in in Ukrainian universities who   had the flee and they they went to the Polish 
border and they wouldn't be let in the polls   were like that ain't coming in here we don't let 
people that look like you and Poland um blatantly   racist so now they they talk about these uh you 
know they lack the uh the the proper certificates   or the proper certifications Etc um I don't know 
gosh when Joe Biden makes an unannounced visit to   uh Poland and uh of course no American president 
uh flies alone there's going to be a C5 aircraft   Landing uh with you know uh armored you know 
sedans and Secret Service guys full of guns none   of which are registered I'll tell you why they're 
not registered because the security protocol or   the president United States is classified 
top secret that means the composition of   his security detail is not to be known by anybody 
so we're not going to admit what we have in this   vehicle what this guy's carrying or anything we 
don't tell the polls any of that stuff because   they don't have a need to know we will never 
let them know now when was the last time they   strip searched the Secret Service agents of the 
United States of America answers never um and so   what we have here is a double standard Poland is 
set with South Africa for a number of reasons one   South Africa is not going to arrest Vladimir Putin 
when he arrives in Pretoria for the brics summit   even though that the international criminal court 
has issued a warrant for his arrest based upon   Basil's allegations of child kidnapping and uh 
I forget what the other one is but um they've   accused him of two things that are just ludicrous 
but you know Poland and Ukraine and other nations   have said he must be arrested the moment he lands 
in South Africa because South Africa signed the   um you know the the Accords that uh that that that 
bring this up in South Africa went yeah we ain't   going to do that um and so the polls are angry 
so this is retaliation simple the other thing is   bricks South Africa's original member of brics the 
Brazil Russia India China South Africa economic   Forum that's actually rapidly growing at the brics 
uh Summit which is taking place in South Africa by   the way um 19 Nations have applied this year for 
membership 19. including by the way Saudi Arabia   Iran others Egypt Turkey um the whole world and 
uh and what it means is that South Africa is part   of a movement that's gravitating away from the G7 
NATO Poland Ukraine um and trying to live their   lives free of the interference of the United 
States so Poland's exacting their Revenge now   here's the other thing I'll give uh I'll put out 
there Owen didn't do this without instructions   you see because the the polls aren't in the 
business of doing this on their own the polls   were told by the United States we'd like 
you to rough up the South African delegation   send them a signal and uh the polls went 
sure we can do that because we're racist   we have no problem doing this because these are 
black people and we don't like that and so we're   really gonna fight and they did but to think that 
the polls woke up in the morning and said hmm   let's go irritate the government that's hosting 
the brics Forum that can have an economic impact   on our future um you know most sane people go 
that's not what we want to do especially if we   want to get bricks to change their mind what 
we'd like to do is actually treat these guys   well and maybe on the return trip invite them in 
for some you know abortion uh vodka and you know   sing songs and have a good time and bond with 
them so that the next time we sit down and say   hey we have concerns about X Y and Z they'll say 
those polls are good guys so yeah we're going to   sit down and listen to them you know what's going 
to happen the next time somebody brings up Poland   and South Africa they're going to say those are 
racist people the most racist people in Europe   second only the ukrainians uh in terms of their 
racism and they're also recognized as American   Stooges because this didn't happen without America 
given a direct order rough up to South Africans   that has been our candid speech development of 
a candidate speech is for us to discuss what   you understood about the speech and for us to 
come up with own perspectives about the speech   yeah so uh before you leave please make sure to 
like subscribe and hit the notification Bell uh   it's the best way especially that like button 
in the notification Bell espresso for YouTube   channel this is a good video and really recommend 
it to more recommended people like you okay and uh   with that said uh it's been me mikeymushi from 
2nacheki and always remember Africa is watching|||And my mother? She sold me. It's so hard to live when you can't trust your mother. Come back to Wawel Castle. Wait patiently for your destiny. The Royal Insignia have magical powers. And now who are you standing before, Lord Treasurer? Before the king.||| |||In a major effort to modernize the fleet of tracked combat vehicles Polish Defense Minister Mariusz Błaszczak on March 1 signed a framework agreement for the procurement of about 1,400 Borsuk infantry fighting vehicles Borsuk is an amphibious infantry fighting vehicle produced by Huta Stalowa Wola, a part of PGZ, designed to replace the fleet of obsolete BWP-1 The first deliveries are scheduled between 2024 and 2025 "The first four examples will be tested by the Polish Armed Forces this year," said the Polish Minister Borsuk IFV is a modern tracked vehicle designed for mechanized infantry elements with the expectation of bringing high combat efficiency as well as features superior to the old infantry fighting vehicles It is known that these vehicles were field tested by the Polish army at the Orzysz training ground on November 14, 2022 Development of this vehicle began in 2014 and the first version was unveiled in September 2017 at the Polish Defense Exhibition Borsuk weighs 25 tons, when equipped with additional armor, it can be up to 40 tons The vehicle has a length of 7.5 m, a width of 3.5 m and a height of 2.7 m Borsuk IFV is equipped with basic armor, capable of protecting against shell fragments and mine blasts In addition, Borsuk can also install other armor layers depending on requirements and tasks The layout of the Borsuk is divided into three main sections with the driver's position in the front left a turret mounted in the middle, and the troop compartment at the rear. The vehicle's combat crew has 3 people including: driver, gunner and commander It can also carry up to 8 fully armed soldiers Borsuk is based on a tracked chassis developed and manufactured entirely in Poland The vehicle uses a MTU 8V199 TE20 diesel engine with a capacity of 720 horsepower, allowing it to travel at a speed of 70 km/h, a range of 600 km When overcoming water obstacles, the IFV can develop a speed of up to 8 km/h The Borsuk is fitted with a remotely-controlled turret, which was developed under the ZSSW-30 program It is armed with a 30 mm cannon There is a coaxial 7.62 mm machine gun and two Spike LR anti-tank guided missile launchers The turret has a modern fire control system with a hunter-killer capability The ZSSW-30 turret has been developed as a separate program.  Due to an on-board weapon system, the infantry fighting vehicle has the ability to fight infantry armored vehicles, air targets and other objects in all weather conditions and at any time of the day It is estimated that a single Borsuk IFV could cost around $6.6 million Cost of the Polish remotely-controlled turret would constitute almost 50% of the vehicle value After the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact military bloc Poland has about 1,300 BMP-1 and BWP-1 infantry fighting vehicles designed by the Soviet Union since the 1960s The new Borsuk infantry fighting vehicle procurement package will take the combat power of Polish infantry to a whole new level|||The episode's partner is the Militaria.pl store, where Black Weeks has just started with discounts of up to 70%. Link in the description. "You have enemies? That's good. It means you've defended something during your life." These words come from the mouth of Winston Churchill, one of the greatest politicians in the history of the world. Although Churchill himself lived to a ripe old age, dying of a stroke at the age of 90, he knew perfectly well that constantly being in the spotlight was associated with the risk of losing his life. History knows many such cases, and the 20th century - the time of great wars, crises and new political systems - was extremely abundant in this respect. Already in the first years of this turbulent period, one of the most significant murders occurred - the shooting of Austrian Prince Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo in 1914, which marked the beginning of the First World War. The 20th century is also a history of radicals who tried to forcibly eliminate the most significant representatives of the ruling camps. The assassination of President John Kennedy, who died at the hands of an assassin while passing through Dallas in 1963, still captures the imagination of conspiracy theory fans. Like the murder of Italian Prime Minister Aldo Moro, whose body was found in the trunk of an abandoned car in '78 . There were also many conflicts and attacks in Poland, which in the 20th century was a real melting pot of views and beliefs. Taking into account the political background at that time, including regaining independence, then World War II, and finally the traumatic period of communism, it can be said that Polish political activists were constantly exposed to danger. December 1922 in Poland was marked by the first presidential elections in history. The head of state was elected by the National Assembly. During four rounds, the leaders of the largest party groups were eliminated one by one. The final, fifth vote included only two candidates: Maurycy Zamoyski, representing the right wing, and Gabriel Narutowicz, former Minister of Foreign Affairs and representative of the left wing PSL "Wyzwolenie". After obtaining 56% of the votes thanks to support from the left, center and national minorities, Narutowicz won the elections. Many MPs voted not so much for him as against Zamoyski, who, as one of the largest landowners in the country, could not count on the support of left-wing supporters of agrarian reform. Information about Narutowicz's victory electrified right-wing circles, which, expressing their dissatisfaction, organized demonstrations and marches on the streets of Warsaw. The new president was described as an anti-religious freemason representing the interests of world finance. Despite the clearly felt tension manifested by the specter of civil war, few probably expected that the term of office of Gabriel Narutowicz would also be the shortest presidential term in the history of Poland. Eligiusz Niewiadomski was a trained painter. He graduated from the Academy of Fine Arts in St. Petersburg. Privately, he was a staunch supporter of nationalism. In his youth, he became involved with the national-democratic movement, openly supporting Roman Dmowski. In his opinion, the country was heading towards left-wing decay, for which he originally blamed Józef Piłsudski, but when he decided not to run for president, Niewiadomski transferred his antipathy to the newly appointed Narutowicz. Their paths crossed on December 16, 1922, just 5 days after Narutowicz was sworn into his new office. The president was then present at the opening of the exhibition in the Zachęta building in Warsaw. Niewiadomski also appeared there - equipped with a revolver, from which he fired three bullets at Narutowicz. There was panic in the building. A nearby doctor almost immediately diagnosed the death as a result of internal bleeding. Niewiadomski did not run away from the scene and voluntarily handed himself over to the police. He showed a similar attitude during the trial. He did not appeal against the death sentence imposed on him. The sentence was executed by firing squad on January 31, 2023. After the execution, the right-wing press described Niewiadomski as a madman, the only one responsible for the crime. Meanwhile, taking into account the anti-presidential campaign and the atmosphere of hatred fueled by the enemy camp, it is hard not to get the impression that Niewiadomski was not the only person responsible for Narutowicz's death. Hello, this is Warsaw and all Polish Radio stations. This morning at 5:40, German troops crossed the Polish border, violating the non-aggression pact. A number of cities were bombed. You will soon hear a special announcement. During World War II, many representatives of the Polish political elite died at the hands of the enemy. An example is the then president of Warsaw, Stefan Starzyński, who, after the German attack on Poland and despite attempts to convince him to leave the country, remained in the capital, taking an active part in forming the defense of the city . I am starting to create units defending Warsaw. The first unit is to be ready immediately. We must immediately show that Warsaw has its own soldiers, its own Varsovians, who will stand with weapons in their hands, even today, at this moment, even in an hour or two, and will fight for Warsaw and their homeland. From childhood, Starzyński was taught love for his homeland, which he expressed in later years by joining the Polish Legions after the outbreak of World War I, and when, as the president of Warsaw , he kept Poles' spirits up with speeches on Polish Radio during the dramatic period of the September campaign. "I wanted Warsaw to be great. I believed that it would be great. (...) today I see great Warsaw," he said, when the capital and its inhabitants were defending themselves against the aggressor. The attack on Poland ruined the development plan for Warsaw, which Starzyński had developed in cooperation with ministers and President Mościcki. The assumptions included not only the further development of communication infrastructure and the construction of new apartments, of which approximately 100,000 were built during Starzyński's term of office , but also the adaptation of the capital to host events such as the Olympic Games or the World Industrial Exhibition. The Germans arrested President Starzyński on 27 October '39. A month after the capitulation of Warsaw. He was detained in the city hall and, after interrogations, placed in police custody. Later, he was transported to the Pawiak prison, from which underground activists planned to get him out. Documents and a new hiding place were prepared, but Starzyński knew that his disappearance would end in revenge on innocent Poles. He didn't want to endanger anyone, so he didn't accept help. It is known that he stayed in Pawiak until December '39. At the end of that month he disappeared without a trace, and his further fate was shrouded in mystery for a long time. These barbaric methods of beating specifically on churches or national monuments, such as the castle or Belvedere... These barbaric methods that have nothing to do with war, that are not war, that are bandit methods, must arouse anger, severe anger that will avenge these all the wrongs that the people of Warsaw suffer today. There are at least several versions as to when and how Stefan Starzyński died . One of them directs the attention of interested parties to a German labor camp established on the site of a former potassium salt mine. According to this account, the president died in '44, tortured by standing in one place with buckets of water hanging on his shoulders. According to another version, he was killed a year earlier in or near the Dachau concentration camp, where Starzyński was supposedly sent for refusing to cooperate with the Germans. Some witnesses claimed that before his death, the president was placed in a special bunker and his own speeches were played non-stop for three days. But both these and many other versions were considered untrue by the Institute of National Remembrance. According to the findings of the Institute of National Remembrance, the whole story ended in '39, between December 21 and 23. Based on the testimonies of witnesses, it was assumed that three Gestapo men were behind Starzyński's death and shot him near Warsaw. However, it is not known who issued such an order or where the President was buried. After the end of World War II in 1945, the Republic of Poland and its citizens were still far from freedom. The only thing that changed was the occupier, who did not hesitate to use even the most radical measures to maintain the communist system. For this reason, members of the Polish United Workers' Party, the then ruling party, were perceived by many citizens as traitors to the nation. It is therefore not surprising that in the Polish People's Republic there was no shortage of stories in which politics was intertwined with death. Although not all high-level assassinations were motivated solely by ideological reasons. In 1971 , the body of Jan Gerhard, a member of the Sejm on behalf of the Polish United Workers' Party, was found in a Warsaw apartment . The secretary of the weekly Forum, of which the 50-year-old was the editor-in-chief, informed the police about his disappearance. The condition of the corpse, or rather the mutilated head, the dagger stuck in the back and the belt tightened around the neck, clearly indicated that the perpetrators had no mercy. Gerhard was a wealthy person, but the robbery motive was contradicted by the 12,000 zlotys that the police found in his jacket pocket. It is true that several valuable items were lost , but due to the social status of the victim and the way in which the apartment was plundered, including documents taken out and scattered around, it was assumed that the motive for the murder was political. Jan Gerhard was not just an MP engaged in journalistic activities. He was also a retired soldier of the Polish People's Army with the rank of colonel. One of the accepted hypotheses assumed that his death could have been revenge for his participation in Operation Vistula, the aim of which was to displace the Ukrainian population from south-eastern Poland and liquidate the units of the Ukrainian Insurgent Army operating there . The press publications about the UPA committed by the deceased were also far from favorable, which led the case even further to the path of possible revenge. Gerhard was also one of the members of the commission established in the early 1970s to investigate the circumstances of the death of General Karol Świerczewski, whose death was used as a pretext for carrying out the above-mentioned "Wisła". Świerczewski died in 1947, on his way to a military garrison located in the areas fighting with the UPA. According to the official version, along the way there was a confrontation with Ukrainians, which resulted in Świerczewski's death. General Świerczewski made this decision unexpectedly , at the last moment, deciding to drive into an unguarded area. General Świerczewski responded to our warnings by repeating the order, and you know how it is in the army, an order is an order. Doubts as to the actual course of events were raised by conflicting witness statements regarding the duration of the fight itself and the number of people taking part in it. Moreover, the commission established after the incident indicated that the general died after being hit by two bullets, although the marks on his uniform indicated that he had been shot three times. The accumulated doubts meant that the investigation was resumed at the beginning of the 1970s, and Gerhard was one of the members of the body responsible for preparing a new report. Perhaps the results would have come to light if the document (if it existed at all) had not been stolen from the safe belonging to the chairman of the commission, and its member, Jan Gerhard, had not been murdered in his own apartment. During the investigation, scenarios such as linking Gerhard's death with his alleged intelligence activities were also analyzed. The murdered man's rich love life, which he led with many married women, was also analyzed . But the case was solved thanks to traveler's checks to Bulgaria, which the murdered man purchased before his death and which were included in the list of documents stolen from his apartment. The person who put the checks into circulation testified that he obtained them from Zygmunt Garbacki, the fiancé of Gerhard's daughter. Garbacki, although he came from an intelligentsia family. maintained contacts with the so-called social margin. He exchanged his studies at the Faculty of Architecture for libations and theft. He claimed that he killed him because Gerhard agreed to marry his daughter Małgorzata. The politician actually set some conditions, but they were limited only to completing studies before getting married. For the 27-year-old, however, it was an insurmountable wall because he was expelled from the university due to absenteeism and poor grades. But importantly, Garbacki did not act alone. He was helped in committing the crime by his friend, Marian Wojtasik, who was supposed to receive money for the work he had done. Wojtasik, who has committed attacks including: he pointed out that by murdering the singer Jerzy Połomski, Garbacki intended to make it easier for himself to obtain the fortune of his would-be father-in-law. He had planned to kill him earlier, but a good opportunity came only on August 20, '71. To direct investigators towards a political motive, the perpetrators deliberately scattered various documents around the apartment. Interest in the trial of Garbacki and Wojtasik was so great that admission to the trial was possible only after presenting a special ticket. The defendants pleaded guilty to the murder they were accused of, although Garbacki maintained that he did it for his fiancée, who was restrained by her father. However, the court did not find any mitigating circumstances and, finding that the perpetrators acted solely for robbery purposes, sentenced them to death, which, according to press reports, was executed in January '73. But Jan Gerhard's death was talked about for a long time. There were many suspicions that the trial was fixed and the robbery motive only served to conceal the political conspiracy. Believe us, we cannot perform a miracle in one year. And if we wanted to perform such miracles, we would move from the category of communists responsible for the country to the category of miracle workers, and miracle workers will not help our country in any way. While the murder of Jan Gerhard is officially considered solved , there are many cases in the pages of Polish history that are still shrouded in mystery. One of them is the crime committed by the Jaroszewicz couple in 1992. Throughout the 1970s, Piotr Jaroszewicz held the office of Prime Minister. It was during his term of office that a wave of strikes took place in Poland in June 1976, caused by drastic increases in food prices. At the beginning of the next decade, the Prime Minister was removed from power and soon after removed from the party. In 1992, Jaroszewicz and his wife Alicja lived in a villa in Anin, Warsaw. On the night of August 31 to September 1, several attackers entered the property. The next hours were marked by the ordeal to which the former prime minister and his wife were subjected. It is known that after breaking into the villa, Jaroszewicz was taken to his office where the 83-year-old retired activist was brutally tortured and strangled. No mercy was shown to his wife either, who was kept in the bathroom all this time and finally shot with a gun belonging to her husband. The bodies of the murdered were found by their son, who came to the house in Anin, concerned about the lack of contact. An investigation was initiated, from the very beginning focused on the robbery motive, even though no valuables were missing from the villa. In addition, the officers who arrived at the scene trampled some of the tracks. The professionalism prevailing at that time is evidenced by the fact that a cigarette butt smoked by one of the investigators was mistakenly included in the evidence . It is therefore not surprising that the way the services acted aroused suspicions as to their actual intentions, thus contributing to the emergence of conspiracy theories. Those who looked for something more than a robbery motive in the Jaroszewiczes' death were fueled by the fact that despite the victims' restraints, the prime minister's right hand remained untied. As if he was going to sign something before he died. Moreover, despite the obvious injuries, Jaroszewicz's shirt was suspiciously clean. It is not known why the perpetrators would have allowed him to change his clothes before his death. According to popular theories, the death of the Jaroszewicz family was linked to documents that the Prime Minister, while still a soldier, allegedly obtained during World War II. It was about the Nazi archives, which, according to rumors, contained information that discredited the then political leaders of the international arena. According to this theory, together with Jaroszewicz , the Sudetes guide Tadeusz Steć and the general of the Polish People's Army, Jerzy Fonkowicz, were in possession of such documents . What all three of them have in common is that they were all murdered in the 1990s. Stec died half a year after Jaroszewicz. Fonkowicz only five years later, but the torture he was subjected to before his death was similar to that suffered by the former prime minister. Another reason for the murder of the former politician was seen in the so-called matryoshka dolls, i.e. lookalikes of the most important activists of communist Poland, allegedly planted by Moscow . Jaroszewicz allegedly learned from General Świerczewski that Soviet comrades sent their version of Bolesław Bierut to the Vistula . Supporters of this theory do not rule out that not only Jaroszewicz died because of access to this knowledge, but also the previously mentioned Świerczewski, known for his promiscuous language. Yet another theory concerns the books that Jaroszewicz wrote in the 1990s and in which, according to this version, he revealed too many secrets of the then government. The trial regarding the murder of the Jaroszewicz family began in '94. Four criminals known to law enforcement agencies sat on the stand. The key evidence in the proceedings was the testimony of the concubine of one of them, who revealed that the men were planning an attack on the former prime minister and his wife. Ultimately, the woman withdrew her words, and the remaining evidence was so weak that even the prosecutor requested the acquittal of the accused. The next chapter of this story opened only in 2005. The investigation was resumed due to technological progress and the development of new systems that could have contributed to the correct identification of fingerprints secured in the Jaroszewicz house. And perhaps it could have been done, if not for the fact that the foil with fingerprints on it was lost. The foil was found only years later, but it did not bring anything new to the case. In 2020, three former members of the so-called karate gang - a criminal group operating in the 1990s. However, this does not mean that the case has been solved. The legal proceedings are ongoing and whether the right people were blamed remains a matter of dispute. - Hello. - Good evening, good evening. - Hello, hello, very nice welcome. - I heard today is our birthday? - Yes, yes, yes. - I would like to express my best wishes: good health, prosperity... - Thank you very much. - That you will always be fit and fit... - Okay... - And that everything will be as good as possible, that everything will go according to your thoughts. - Thank you very much for remembering. I'm very glad you called. - If you want it, it will work out, - If you want it, it will work out. That's true. In the 1990s, the world of the political scene and the so-called the underworld intertwined regularly. Politicians who, due to their positions, were able to offer favorable arrangements for property or law often fell victim to extortion or willingly agreed to cooperate in exchange for private benefits. It is true that Jacek Dębski died in 2001, but his activity was largely at the end of the 20th century. The peak of his political career was in 1997, when he became the head of the Office of Physical Culture and Tourism. He was removed from his duties three years later, as a result of an interview he gave to one of the newspapers. He confessed that a high-ranking politician encouraged him to collect materials compromising, among others, Aleksander Kwaśniewski. After this event, Dębski's relations with the criminal world intensified. The former minister borrowed money at high interest and invested in fraudulent interests. One of the people to whom he transferred capital with the intention of multiplying it was Jeremiasz Barański, alias "Mutton", one of the fathers of the Polish mafia. Dębski probably died because he demanded the return of the invested funds. His life was ended by paid murderer Tadeusz Maziuk alias. "Sasza", who shot the former minister on April 12, 2001, near one of Warsaw's restaurants. But neither Baranina nor Maziuk were sentenced. Their dead bodies were found in their cells before the trial ended. - There was a woman, a very good friend, but without any subtext. - And why did Minister Dębski leave? Perhaps they wanted to talk about something so that the wrong ears wouldn't hear it. A sentence of 8 years' imprisonment was imposed on 26-year-old Halina Galińska, alias "Inka", who accompanied Dębski on that memorable evening and who, at Baranina's request, led the former politician out of the restaurant, exposing him to the killer's crosshairs. The woman left prison in 2009 and left Poland with her French husband, who was still behind bars. Years after the murder of Jacek Dębski, new theories emerged suggesting that there were two shooters on the night of April 12, 2001, and that the execution itself was related to the former minister's alleged connections with the State Protection Office. People who decide to become politically active must take into account that sooner or later they will make enemies. And it's half the trouble if this hostility ends only in words. It's one thing if emotions take over and invective is replaced by a fired bullet. Analyzing the cases of murders of politicians from the last century, it is impossible to escape the impression that although times are changing, and with them the society and the political and economic situation are changing, the truth remains unchanged that in sports, as well as in politics, it is more difficult to be an athlete than to be an athlete. fan. The episode's partner is the Militaria.pl store, where Black Weeks has just started with discounts of up to 70%. Link in the description.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||THANKS FOR JOINING US HERE ON NEWS NATION RUSH HOUR. I'M NICHOLE BERLIE. AND NOW TO THE GROWING REFUGEE CRISIS AS A UKRAINE. THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE FLEEING NOW ALMOST 3.3 MILLION AMONG THE PLACES FACING A DRAMATIC POPULATION INCREASE THE CITY OF SHOULD NOT FAR FROM THE BORDER CORRESPONDENT ROBERT SHERMAN JOINING US AGAIN LIVE NEAR THE BORDER. KNOW ROBERT, THE CROSSING IS RIGHT BEHIND YOU. WHAT'S HAPPENING OUT THERE. PATRICK ELWOODE: WELL, THE SEARCH HAS NOT GONE ANYWHERE. NICOLE, WHAT WE KNOW IS THAT WITH THE LATEST NUMBERS COMING FROM THE U N NEARLY 2 MILLION UKRAINIANS HAVE FLED THEIR OF THE PEOPLE YOU SEE COMING ACROSS THAT BORDER. THERE'S COMING HERE WITH NOTHING BUT A SUIT CASE AND THE CLOTHES ON THIS MAN DOESN'T MEET THE SHOOTING. ALSO TROUBLE, IT'S HARD. PEOPLE ARE FLEEING THE WAR THERE LEAVING EVERYTHING AND THEY HAVE NOTHING LEFT. THEY HAVE NOTHING. NO FOOD, NO MONEY. AND SUCH AN INFLUX OF REFUGEES IS SURE TO HAVE AN IMPACT ON ANY COMMUNITY. THINK ABOUT NUMBER FOR A SECOND. 2 MILLION REFUGEES THAT HAVE PULL IN THE CAPITAL OF WARSAW, WHICH THE LARGEST CITY IN POLAND. IT'S ABOUT 1.7 TO 1.8 MILLION PEOPLE. SO THIS IS A LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE COME IN. TOWN MOSH DA TELLS US THAT HIS TOWN, WHICH IS RIGHT ON THE FRONT LINES OF THIS WHOLE CRISIS. IT'S SIMPLY OVERWHELMED. LISTEN TO THIS. KUZ SHOULD GET A OF THIS BECAUSE WE HAVE NEVER SEEN A REFUGEE CRISIS LIKE THIS SINCE THE SECOND WORLD WAR. WE NEED HELP. 2 MILLION HAVE ALREADY CROSSED INTO POLAND. THEY WILL NEED LONG-TERM ACCOMMODATIONS WE WELCOME. AND THAT MAYOR TELLS US THAT THE WRITING IS ALREADY ON THE WALL. THINK ABOUT THIS FOR A SECOND. WE TALK ABOUT THESE NUMBERS OF PEOPLE WHO HAVE FLED UKRAINE. WELL, THERE ARE MILLIONS OF UKRAINE IS THAT ARE DISPLACED WITHIN THE COUNTRY ITSELF. MANY OF THEM WELL, AS WE POINTED OUT EARLIER IN THE SHOW. THAT IS A CITY THAT HAS BEEN THE SUBJECT OF MORE BOMBINGS CLOSER TO THE CITY CENTER. SO THE MAYOR TELLS US THAT IF THAT THAT HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS WILL BE FLEEING FROM LVIV TO POLAND IN SHORT, HE BELIEVES THAT THE SITUATION IS GOING TO|||I promise, that I will be a good king. Jadwiga, the holy lady,  was someone not of this world. I will not sow fear. I will be good and merciful. May God reward your heart, Queen. Such a queen is a blessing from God. Jadwiga has gotten on with her grandmother.  It will be good governance. I swear before God and His Holy Angels  that I will uphold law and justice. Cheers, Queen! The king deserves to be welcomed. And the poor deserve bread! God bless you, our King! Mother of the poor... Escape of the unfortunate... A refuge for the weak... Thank you, our queen. A refuge for the weak... Jewel of the temple... Adornment of the Church... Generous, wise and good.  And a saint at that! You are my happiness, Hedwig. Of the whole Crown, of all the subjects. They love no one as much as they love you! No one cared for the poor as much as the brightest lady. I want my subjects to understand the Word of God. Let us start work immediately. We need a faculty of theologians and lawyers. That is why the psalms need to be translated. And let us create the best university in the world. Build the University's headquarters instead.  It is my gift to him. There, in Prague, I dream of a dormitory full of Lithuanian students studying the sacred treaties. Her knowledge is unimaginably deep. What an extraordinary woman she is! So wise and strong. She speaks languages, quotes holy books. Maria and Marta... Thought and humility have become the highest virtues for me. Queen, you already know what true faith is! And if anyone can write, let them put the two letters M in memory of her. God should be worshipped with prayer.  But God is equally loved by action: almsgiving, education, mercy. The Queen should not show up without valuables.  The Duchaks' hospital will need them more. May God reward you, lady, for ensuring that my children will have something to eat. Please, take it. Thank you, lady! May God guide you. May you stop being afraid! Cheers! We have governed well together, haven't we? Wisely and justly. You were the real king of Poland. The ways in which God leads us are unsearchable. Push! NOO!! Queen! Do I play the queen well?  There has not been and will not be a more wonderful one than you.|||Czy w Polsce da się powiedzieć... nie w Polsce - jak spotykasz tutaj kogoś kto jest z Polski czy da się powiedzieć z którego regionu Polski pochodzą? Tylko po tym jak mówią po Polsku? więc to Właśnie powiedziałeś "więc"! Jest... właśnie powiedziałem "więc" To jest trochę bardziej skomplikowane. Jeśli chodzi o Polskę. Wyjaśnię dlaczego. Nie zaczynaliśmy nigdy vloga o 9:30 wieczorem ale zaczynamy dzisiaj ponieważ Nie wiem dlaczego nam się to cały czas zdarza... no, cały czas Drugi raz nam się to zdarzyło. Wracaliśmy do domu ze spotkania i biegł sobie pies przez środek ulicy. Jadę bez zapiętego pasa. Nie mówcie nikomu.   Wzięliśmy go ze sobą bo był bardzo przyjazny.   Posłaliśmy ogłoszenie na lokalnej grupie na facebook. Możemy pokazać psa, Blonnie? Sztorm! Chodź tu, Sztorm! O jest, proszę bardzo. Wiemy już, że nazywa się Sztorm bo napisaliśmy na jednej z lokalnych grup na facebooku. Na konkretnej grupie facebookowej dla naszego miasta. ...i już ktoś odpowiedział z imieniem psa. Zgubił się ...oczywiste, że się zgubił. Wcześniej dzisiaj się zgubił i tak się składa, że MY go zobaczyliśmy. Biegł sobie przed naszym samochodem jakby w stronę pobocza i baliśmy się, że ktoś go uderzy więc go zabraliśmy. Oto on. Jest bardzo, bardzo przyjazny jak widzicie. Super przyjazny pies, bardzo fajny. Cześć Sztorm. Ludzie już się tagują na tej grupie. Powiedzieli nam, że pies na imię ma Sztorm. Sztorm jest teraz z nami. Tymczasowo. Jedziemy do centrum miasta. Nie, nie - jedź spowrotem na Hence's (lokalna droga). W nadziei zwrócenia tego psa jego właścicielowi. Zatem przy odrobinie szczęścia zdarzy się to jeszcze dzisiaj. Dodamy uaktualnienie. Jak tam? Twój pies? Chodź tu kolego. Jest świetny. Gdzie on był? Na tej drodze. Tutaj na drodze? Tak. My go szukaliśmy itd. Jechaliśmy do domu i biegł sobie jakby przed naszym samochodem. Mam przyjemność obwieścić, że pies odnalazł swojego właściciela. Ponownie są razem i my się dobrze z tym czujemy. Teraz jest już kolejny dzień i... chciałem powiedzieć coś mądrego, ale tak właściwie to nic nie mam. Chyba po prostu... Jest zimno. To powiedz. Zaczniemy ten odcinek. To jest mądre? Chyba to już milion razy powiedzieliśmy. Oczywiście nie jest zimno po mojej stronie. Jest tylko zimno po Blonnie stronie. Ojej... Tobie też jest zimno. Nie jest mi zimno. Dlatego masz na sobie grubą kurtkę. Tak, ale Tobie jest zimno nawet w kurtce. Tak właściwie to mam dwie kurtki na sobie i wciąż mi zimno. Ja lubię zimę. Zima to moja rzecz. i teraz... jest Justin. Cześć Justin. Cześć, trochę zimno. Jak się masz? Trochę zimno... hahaha Dokładnie. Właśnie o tym mówił. Czy możesz powiedzieć po ludzi akcencie skąd szą... Czy da się powiedzieć po ludzi akcencie skąd pochodzą w USA? Ta... tak. Zdecydowanie? W większości. Tak może w 98% przypadków. Chyba że są z tych środkowo-wschodnich stanów szczerze powiedziawszy. Np. jeśli ktoś jest.. Czyli wtedy możesz powiedzieć, że są z tych stanów środkowo-zachodnich. Tak, ale jest ich bardzo dużo. Znaczy się... czy Twoim zdaniem ludzie w Maryland mają akcent? Ja go nie słyszę. Ja nie myślę, że ludzie w Maryland mają... Wiadomo, że jeśli bym słyszał akcenty lepiej to byłbym lepszy w ich używaniu. Moim zdaniem... myślę, że są bardzo specyficzne rejony USA, w których ludzie mają akcent i jest mniej więcej połowa gdzie wszyscy brzmią tak samo. Wiesz, Boston ma bardzo specyficzny akcent. Ludzie z Nowego Jorku w konkretnych rejonach mają akcent. Południe ma swój wyraźny akcent i reszta niejako... Czekaj i jeszcze Fargo, cała Północna Dakota itd. Oni mają bardzo wyraźny akcent. Wisconsin. Tak. Poza tym większość innych stanów moim zdaniem brzmi bardzo średnio. Są mniejsze regiony, nawet w Maryland jak Dundalk. Słyszałam, że tam mają bardzo konkretny regionalny akcent, ale ogólnie to tak mniej więcej 40 na 60 40% ma bardzo wyraźny akcent z różnych miejsc i 60% to po prostu Angielski. Amerykański Angielski oczywiście. Tak. Bo jest również Brytyjski Angielski i Australijski Angielski i No tak, trzeba to zaznaczyć, Amerykański Angielski. Irlandzki Angielski. Wszystkie te są bardzo odmienne. Te akcenty słyszę. Nie jestem aż tak głuchy na akcenty. Bogdan wrote that the most important thing is to not worry and be yourself. An I... I agree with this completely, Bogdan. One day at the very beginning of time years ago I read, when I was working on my first business here in USA I had huge ambitions back then to be a wedding photographer. I read a book that was named "The brand called YOU". Which basically means that you are your brand. You are your brand. In other words Your business, the face of your business and what your company represents is in an essence your own personality. And that's something you should be selling. And this... Dobry dzień na kilka zdjęć. Zgadza się. Aaaaand I agree with this if you are not showing to people this, this... essence of your own personality then it's very difficult, a lot more difficult to sell anything that you want to sell. W Polsce jak mówisz mi o tych lokalnych dialektach jak ja przed chwilą powiedziałam o USA jest mniej więcej podział 40/60 procent. Przy czym te 40% ma bardzo specyficzne akcenty. Powiedziałbyś, że każdy region Polski ma swój dialekt? Czy są tylko konkretne regiony, które mają dialekty? Są specyficzne regiony Polski, które mają bardzo specyficzny akcent jak np. Śląsk. Jak my jedziemy do Warszawy, Poznania, Szczecina Suwałk albo nawet pod granicę wschodnią ludzie mogą i natychmiast usłyszą, że jesteśmy konkretnie ze Śląska. Ludzie spod wchodniej granicy, mieszkający blisko Białorusi, Litwy, Ukrainy również będą mieli specyficzny akcent i swój lokalny dialekt. Bardziej akcent, powiedziałbym niż dialekt. Jest bardzo konkretny i łatwo go rozróżnić. Potem są miejsca jak Kaszuby. To już praktycznie inny język. Jeśli mówią swoim bardzo konkretnym, wiesz... zdecydowanie lokalnym dialektem. Ale... również - i do tego właśnie zmierzałem. Moim zdaniem w całej Polsce są rodziny, albo grupy ludzi - nie wiem jak je usystematyzować, w których kładzie się silny nacisk na mówienie czystym średnim, normalnym Polskim językiem. Dzięki temu słysząc tych ludzi po przyjeździe tutaj nie da się powiedzieć skąd pochodzą z Polski. Bo jeśli mówią czystym Polskim mogą być z dowolnego miejsca w Polsce. Rozumiesz? Czyli jest to niejako trochę bardziej skomplikowana sytuacja niż tutaj ponieważ tutaj jeśli mieszkasz na południu albo mieszkasz w Nowym Jorku albo mieszkasz w New Jersey przez całe życie to będziesz mówić w bardzo konkretny, specyficzny sposób i nie ma od tego. Nie ma od tego wyjątków. Nie da się od tego uciec. Nie ma sytuacji kiedy... wiesz... mieszkasz w Wisconsin ale jakimś cudem przez całe życie mówisz z akcentem południowym. Obydwa są bardzo różne. Do you guys remember how a few episodes ago we recorded a short conversation with a doctor, who is retiring? We took a nice portrait photo of him. He was receiving a very prestigious award in Poland. A prestigious accolade on a behalf of his father. And today the portrait we created for him a few episodes ago we are picking up. It's ready, framed. It's waiting for us. Here, in this store. Cześć, w czym mogę pomóc? Odbieramy zamówienie. Na jakie nazwisko? Brooks. To było coś do oprawy? Tak, do oprawy. Czeka tu od tak dawna, że może już ktoś sprzedał? Nie aż tak długo, tylko od 3go. Tak, sprzedaliśmy już na aukcji! No jest, patrzcie! Pokażesz nam? Tak. Muszę. Żeby się upewnić, że wszystko w porządku i nie ma żadnych problemów. Ja też chcę aparat. Ten wygląda na drogi. Jest niejako drogi. Powiedzmy. Tak wygląda. Będziesz na jego vlogu. To jest Nikon? Panasonic. Ale jest głównie do video. Potrzebuję aparat, który by robił dobre zdjęcia i video. Nie mogę znaleźć właściwego, wiecie? Przyjrzałabym się dobrze Sony. ...i oto jest wielka odsłona. Może zrobimy bębny.... o wow! Patrzcie na to! Wygląda świetnie! To jest... o! On był na vlogu, tak? Wygląda na prawdę dobrze. Co to za vlog? David jest Polakiem więc jest to Polsko-Amerykański vlog. ...i ten gość tak właściwie... Jest na YouTube? Tak, tak. Dlatego się pytam - gdzie go można znaleźć? Nazywa się We Are Going Somewhere. We Are Going Somewhere, tak. Wejdź sobie... Super... sorry, cały czas Ci przerywam! To jest po prostu... my dużo podróżujemy są z tego relacje, a czasem tylko nasze codziennie życie. Jest dużo skrzyżowań między Polską i Ameryką i tak w zasadzie to jest ciekawostka bo ten facet... Wygląda bardzo znajomo. Jest radiologiem w Christiana [szpital]. Też mam kanał na YouTube ale dopiero go zaczęłam. Masz kanał na YouTube? Dopiero zaczęłam. Musisz nam powiedzieć. Jak się nazywa? Nazywa się... chyba się nazywa "Georgia Peach". Być może "The Georgia Peach". Pochodzisz z Georgii? Nie, stąd. Na imię mam Georgina. Rozpoczęłam firmę, która zajmuje się robieniem kolorowego szlamu - bo jest teraz bardzo popularny. Moja córka też... Poważnie? Ty też się szlamem zajmujesz? Pokażę wam, jeśli nie macie nic przeciwko. Jak tylko ten obraz dla was zawinę. Znasz etsy? Wiesz co to jest etsy? Tak, mam własny sklep na etsy. To jest mój. Przeskroluj sobie, to moje szlamy. Wszystkie są z zapachami i są w różnej wielkości pojemnikach i ten nawet w wyciskarce. Wyślemy Ci kilka osób. Dzięki! Muszę to pokazać Sheridon. Będzie jej się... Dopiero zaczęłam. Zrobię sobie tego zdjęcie. Każdy od czegoś zaczyna. Życzę Wam wspaniałych Świąt! Tobie też! Do widzenia! Wydruk odebrany. Wygląda świetnie. Myślę, że ostateczny odbiorca, klient będzie zadowolony. Dostarczamy go w tej chwili, a potem co robimy? Musimy na coś popatrzeć. Coś musimy zobaczyć. Może o tym zavlogujemy, a może nie. Znaczy się jest trochę wyżej, ale... teraz jesteśmy obydwoje w kadrze. Po co to robimy? No dobra, słońce. Bo jest dziwnie w zimie. Próbuję nagrać coś bardzo prostego od trzech dni. Nie da się tego zrobić w studiu bo jest tam super zimno. Nie chcę tego nagrywać na kanapie w domu bo jest to zbyt... ...prywatne środowisko jak dla mnie. Dziwnie się czuję jak vlogujemy z kanapy. To nie jest łatwe w zimie. Chyba potrzebujemy Mam wrażenie, że potrzebujemy konkretnego miejsca gdzie moglibyśmy usiąść jak mamy coś do powiedzenia i coś sobie ponagrywać więc teraz będzie się to odbywało w samochodzie. Podczas jazdy. Są ludzie w Polsce, którzy mówią swoim regionalnym dialektem i nie znają innej formy Polskiego? Zdecydowanie. Poważnie? Oczywiście, że tak. Jest dużo takich miejsc i dużo ludzi, którzy mówią tylko swoim lokalnym dialektem i nie potrafią mówić inaczej. Jak to się dzieje? W szkole nie uczą? Jak to jest, że cały czas mówią lokalnym dialektem? Czy możliwe, że w szkołach uczą w lokalnych dialektach? Moim zdaniem to pochodzi z wiesz... środowiska, w jakim się dorasta. Z domu rodzinnego. Od przyjaciół i najbliższych osób. Myślę, że w szkołach kładzie się większy nacisk na mówienie czystym poprawnym Polskim, ale nie jestem do końca pewien jak to wygląda w każdym najmniejszym miejscu w Polsce. Myślę, że to się wykształca w domu rodzinnym, w rodzinie. Dzięki za uwagę. Przepraszamy, że znowu była długa przerwa, ale chyba czas przyznać że robimy co się da. Sytuacja jest nadal taka sama. Po prostu musimy się skupić na zarabianiu dostatecznej ilości pieniędzy na życie. W chwili obecnej. Dlatego vogowanie jest niejako mniej częste niż było. W obecnej chwili nie jesteśmy chyba w stanie, to znaczy się... jestem gotów przyznać. Muszę to w tym momencie przyznać Nie jestem chyba w stanie wrócić do cotrzydniowego rozkładu w tej chwili, ale się nie poddaję. Wiesz, w przyszłości może nadejdzie znowu czas kiedy powrócimy do szybszego tempa. Mam nadzieję, że w pewnej chwili się tak stanie i również następny odcinek na tym kanale będzie na prawdę fajnisty. Zostańcie zatem z nami ponieważ w niedzielę Dzisiaj jest co? Środa? Dzisiaj jest środa. W tą niedzielę nagrywamy coś na prawdę fajnego. Nie chcę tego jeszcze zbyt ostro promować bo nic nie zostało jeszcze nagrane. Nie wiemy tak właściwie i nie wiemy jak to wyjdzie, ale bazując na ustaleniach, które zostały poczynione i na osobie, która będzie z nami na kanale jestem bardzo podkręcony. Myślę, że będzie bardzo dobrze. Chcesz coś dodać? Dzięki wielkie, że nadal jesteście z nami! Mamy nadzieje, że jest wam bardzo dobrze gdziekolwiek się znajdujecie. Do zobaczenia za kilka dni! 54 mile się przeprowadziłam jako dziecko. Z Natchitoches Louisiana do Hemphill w Teksasie. W Natchitoches dorastałam wymawiając słowo EGEJN. Wiesz, słowo A-G-A-I-N. I jak się przeprowadziłam do Teksasu, tylko o 54 mile dzieciaki w szkole się ze mnie śmiały za wymowę EGEJN. Mówiły mi: to się mówi EGEN, nie EGEJN.|||Thank you so much to
New Chapter For assisting me
With my legalisation And my TRC process New Chapter company
Can help you If you need professional help
regarding your residence permit New Chapter- is a right choice If you need a
residence permit in Poland I recommend
New Chapter company I really glad and
I was able to get a stamp In my passport within 2 month
or even less than 2 month Please Sign Up
for a FREE consultation! Please Sign Up for a
FREE consultation! It is a really great team
of young professionals Sign Up for a
FREE consultation!|||Stop killing us! 
Stop killing us!  There is no doubt that what Pro–the right to live foundation 
is doing with their vans is pure hate speech. He took part in the rally, seeing  that its participants jointly committed
a violent attack on property which was a Renault Master car. He did this for an obvious reason. I believe that the restriction of liberty will do its job on this occasion. Brutally stopping the car, snatching the driver from the car with the use of violence and force and then beating and assaulting 
a man by a group of people. One of the perpetrators, 
that we know of, used a knife to destroy the car, cutting car parts, 
and damaging tires. This is not some South American slum. This is the heart of Europe. This is the capital city of Poland. It's not the same knife I used to cut 
those tarpaulins, but it's the first knife that I grabbed from the kitchen today, just like the first knife I grabbed 
from the kitchen then. The whole thing was very much  about what an acceptable protest aesthetic is. Can a man have a knife at a protest, or can he have a masked face at a protest. I cut these tarpaulins with a knife like this and I consider it a good thing, because these
tarpaulins sowed hatred and were deceitful. And of course I can't tear them with my fingers, I don't have sharp enough nails and strong enough fingers. Sometimes it's okay to have a knife in your hand when you're facing violence  that wants to stab you in the back. The mere fact that violence is used as part of a protest does not deprive it of its nature as a protest. It just makes it a non-peaceful protest. It may not be protected under the Convention or the Constitution, but it's still a protest per se. The campaign informs about what 
has been happening in the West for years. Children are taught how to masturbate themselves and others, they learn about risky sexual behavior,
they are encouraged to take  these behaviours to their friends, 
but also to older people. Parading in public spaces with these hateful slogans, crossed out rainbows,  suggesting connections between homosexuality and pedophilia,
is a textbook example of hate speech that violates the dignity of social groups. These types of narrative,  apart from not being based on 
any reliable scientific sources, are an example of inciting violence, 
antagonizing social relations, stigmatizing individual social groups, and in fact it boils down to looking for an enemy. These words, this hate campaign  conducted by the Pro Foundation,
among others, its radical wing was led, at that time, 
by the government, by the ruling party and by the president, 
and simply by the state apparatus. This hate campaign resulted 
in real homophobic violence. It resulted, for example, in attacks on Pride Parades. Freedom of speech has very blurry boundaries. It's taken to extremes and becomes hate speech,  i.e. statements that in some way 
incite hatred or encourage hatred. Sure, we can talk about that, there 
should be freedom of speech like it is in the US, where you 
can say absolutely anything  and you should use different 
strategies, different tactics to confront it. However, there are just as many arguments which say that the other strategies and tactics may not work. On the other hand, allowing such claims  to be made in public spaces
can have measurable effects. History has already taught us that.  Of course, people may disagree with us. People with left-wing views 
believe that each one of us  can say that up until now, 
what time is it,  it's about half past six at the moment... 
until now I was a man, but now I'm a woman. (laughter, applause) Because the left thinks it should be like that. You think we'll be afraid of you? We won't be. Even if we are afraid, we will fight for our lives. Because this is the superior value, 
because human life is important, and it's important that this life is worth something. Our dignity is not an idea, as the judge said. Our dignity is our right. Unalienable! (applause) Foundation Pro Agitator: In this detachment 
from reality, the only hope is prayer. Allies of the convicts: What you are saying 
is such nonsense that only this judge has said more rubbish. Agitator: That's why we're going to say the rosary prayer now. Agitator: (recites the Our Father prayer)
Allies: LGBT right to life, fuck the van!|||IS HAPPENING ON BOTH SIDES. NICOLE, I ABSOLUTELY. AND ROBERT, WE WE CONTINUE TO APPRECIATE YOUR REPORTING ON THIS. THANK YOU. POLAND'S VOTING 45 RUSSIAN DIPLOMATS OUT OF THE COUNTRY. PULL US OFFICIALS SAY THE AMBASSADORS ARE ACTUALLY RUSSIAN INTELLIGENCE OFFICERS USING THEIR STATUS TO COVER AS SPICE OF COURSE, WHY KELLY BEESON JOINS US HERE IN THE NEWSROOM. KELLY, WHAT IS PULLINS REASON FOR DOING THIS TO THE POLISH GOVERNMENT. MAYBE CATCH RUSSIANS RED-HANDED. WELL, NICOLE, WE SPOKE WITH A FOREIGN RELATIONS EXPERT WHO SAYS THIS MOVE TO EXPEL DIPLOMATS FROM POLAND IS MAINLY POLITICALLY SYMBOLIC NOTING THAT OFTEN TIMES COUNTRIES KNOW THESE DIPLOMATS ARE ENGAGING IN ESPIONAGE. HOWEVER, ACTION AGAINST THEM ARE TYPICALLY TAKEN ONE RELATIONS WORSEN ADDING THAT THIS TIMING BY POLAND IS LIKELY A RESPONSE TO THE UKRAINIAN INVASION. THE RUSSIAN INVASION OF UKRAINE. NOW ENTERING A 4TH WEEK. SINCE THE ATTACK STARTED NEIGHBORING POLAND HAS TAKEN IN 2 MILLION FROM THE WAR TORN COUNTRY. WE HAVE IN THIS PARTICULAR INSTANCE BECAUSE OF THE RUSSIAN ATTACK AS THE CAUSE OF THIS OUTFLOW. POLLS HAVE SHOWN REMARKABLE GENEROSITY. CHARLES KUPCHAN IS A SENIOR FELLOW AT THE COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS WHO SAYS. POLAND'S RECENT EXPULSION OF ALLEGED RUSSIAN SPIES FROM THE COUNTRY. IS NOT A NEW OR UNIQUE STRATEGY. AND SERVES MAINLY AS A SYMBOLIC MOVE TO IN ESSENCE, A TO RUSSIA. WE DISAPPROVE OF YOUR GAME IS PLAYED. COUNTRIES DEPLOY TO EACH OTHER. DIPLOMATS THEY DEPLOY THOSE IN DIPLOMATS AT TIMES TO GATHER INTELLIGENCE. SO THAT'S PAR FOR THE COURSE. WHEN YOU SEE AN EXPULSION, IT'S NOT BECAUSE SUDDENLY SOMEONE HAS BEEN DISCOVERED TO BE SPY. IT'S BECAUSE THERE'S A DECISION TAKEN AT A POLITICAL LEVEL TO SEND A MESSAGE THAT WE'RE ESCALATING CONFRONTATION WITH YOU BY ASKING. THESE DOZENS OF INDIVIDUALS TO THE COUNTRY. CAPTION SAYS VALUABLE INFORMATION THESE ALLEGED INFORMANTS MAY HAVE BEEN RELAYING INCLUDES GENERAL POLITICAL INTELLIGENCE WHERE WEAPONS MAY BE COMING INTO UKRAINE FROM POLAND AND HOW THE INFLUX OF REFUGEES IS IMPACTING THE COUNTRY. SOME ANALYSTS GONE SO FAR AS TO SUGGEST THAT THIS IS A DELIBERATE STRATEGY ON BEHALF ON BEHALF OF PUTIN TO TO DESTABILIZE POLAND. CAPTION ADDS THE EXPULSION IS A RELATIVELY SMALL MOVE WHEN COMPARED TO STRATEGIES LIKE SANCTIONS. MILITARY DEPLOYMENTS AND HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE TOPICS. HE BELIEVES PRESIDENT BIDEN WILL BE FOCUSING ON. AND COACH IN ADS. HE WOULDN'T BE SURPRISED TO SEE RUSSIAN ASKING A NUMBER OF POLISH DIPLOMATS TO LEAVE MOSCOW IN THE NEXT FEW DAYS. NOTING QUOTE, THAT IS USUALLY HOW THE GAME IS PLAYED.|||Wszyscy cenimy swój czas, dlatego szukamy najlepszych rozwiązań,
by usprawnić i ułatwić naszą pracę.  Organizacjom pomaga w tym Microsoft PowerApps, będąc jedną z najbardziej wszechstronnych platform
do tworzenia aplikacji typu low-code na świecie!   W Sii pomożemy Ci stworzyć aplikację, która przetwarza informacje z dokumentów papierowych za pomocą technologii OCR, uczenia maszynowego i sztucznej inteligencji  aż trzy razy szybciej niż standardowe
rozwiązania dostępne na rynku.  Już teraz, używając swojego
telefonu lub tabletu, możesz pobierać dane z faktur, paragonów i zamówień dostawy z wiadomości e-mail lub przetwarzać dowolne informacje z formularzy papierowych za pomocą naszej aplikacji; cyfryzować dane i przechowywać w uporządkowanej bazie; oraz importować dane jednym kliknięciem
do dowolnego systemu docelowego, takiego jak ERP (WMS/TMS) lub system do zarządzania relacjami z klientem (CRM). Zakres przypadków dostosujemy
do regulaminu i specyfiki Twojej firmy!    Potrzebujesz ustandaryzowanych podpowiedzi dla pracowników? Nic prostszego!  Przepływ informacji w czasie rzeczywistym? Oczywiście!  Protokół z przyjęcia będzie przesłany elektronicznie zarówno dostawcy, jak i wewnętrznemu działowi kontroli jakości . Stworzymy dla Ciebie środowisko, w którym urządzenia mobilne pomogą nawet w najbardziej złożonych procesach biznesowych.  Jednocześnie wspieramy społeczną odpowiedzialność biznesu CSR i raportowanie ESG, ograniczając zużycie papierowych dokumentów.   Jeśli chcesz przekształcać swoje pomysły biznesowe w skuteczne rozwiązania w szybki sposób, skorzystaj z Microsoft PowerApps dzięki Sii.  |||- Darz Bór and welcome to another video, straight from the Bystrzyckie mountains - Are we in night mode or.. - Yes, it's a bit dark. - It'll be brighter by the second  - This isn't our first snow of the year. Congrats to our friend Zbyszek for the doe dublet he did a week ago  - Our chief gently reminded me that stag hunting is nice but we need to fill the doe plan. That's our goal for today  - I do have 2 more stags to get. Besides that the wild boars and predators. The aura is amazing, perfect blanket of snow over the hill  - We'll take a stroll thru a this huge chunk of forest to try our luck - Later on we'll bring back the doe hunting topic as well. For our rifle we have my 9  - I'm liking it even more recently. Here in the mountains the animal can't run off after the standard shot  - You need to keep it in place, often there's no roads. A bad shot won't do it even with a 9 - Compared to a 308, the 9 does keep the deer in place. Let's start our walk, we'll fly out the drone on our way  - The aura is just beautiful with a slight northern wind  - I'm expecting more game coming from the left side, returning to the forest - We're walking really slowly because it just stopped snowing  - I like to check the exact weather conditions on the Meteo.pl site. It's very precise - That's why I know to look under my feet as well to find a very fresh track like this. We may meet them  - You have to read the forest, look on the ground. This is an obvious signs of doe and a fawn track  - Now we'll go even lower, constantly looking side to side  - A pack of boars walked thru here, it snowed over it so it's not as fresh. Surely from this morning, walking from the left - The game movement is still pretty low  - They ran off. Must have stayed to the left, I've heard a branch crack  - A female with a kid walked 150 m away to the right. At least we've seen one  - That's how a fresh track looks like. We'll move 200-300 m further and come back the same way - I had other plans but the movement is so low. This isn't the first snow when the game becomes stagnant  - They have to adjust first, especially deer. It's weird that I don't see many deer signs now  -  We saw one fresh track of a couple deer and a 1 hour old line. Now we caught that doe - We managed to record them. There's no movement here, there may be some later because it takes them some time to hike up  - I think that the boars already walked thru, I don't know exactly. The deer may still come so I'll move a bit further - I've decided to follow our line back and see if anything crossed it after an 1,5 hours. This is their window of walking - If the lines appear we'll come back. I'll visit this place either way because I know my district and the game behavior  - They just have to adjust to the ''first'' snow. Let's move - We're late yet again. Two boars around 50 kg walked from the left and crossed thru here. It's fresh  - Going against the ''empty feeder'' comments..As you can see they're huge  - A whole wagon of hay fits in. In the last 6-7 years we did feed the wild game but only when they need it  - Not with this little snow and small frost. Instead we have around 30 hectares of fields that we manage and use for this puprose - Mostly clover fields that we turn into haylage bales. I would say around 150 bales weighting 500-600 kg  - The feeders you see right here are common. Every single one has it's manager who comes and add the bale if needed  - We also add the salt blocks. The salt is out all year long, very well seasoned hunting grounds  - We do not hunt near feeders so even if we saw something, we can't shoot. Only foxes - Now let's go and check if something went over our steps  - We looked over a big chunk of land and nothing. Some other signs but absolutely non where we went  - This means that the game is a bit unsure of the snow and doesn't move around. They need 2 days more  - We'll be back. We have a bit of walking to our car so still a chance  - And the hunt is over. I don't want to go back yet with this amazing snowy aura  - With no game movement it's pointless. Some single lines in the busiest areas. I think they just can't get used to the snow, hiding away  - We did see that doe so the hunt was a success. The lines we saw thru the forest are a good indicator that we chose a good spot - We'll be back in one day, it's supposed to snow even harder. Going back we'll check one more place to see if they stayed there  - Now there'll be a interview portion of the video about the future of the Polish Hunting Association  - We were supposed to hunt together with Marcin but the timing wasn't right. The 600 km distance prevent us from doing so  - I'm sure you know who I'm talking about, Marcin Możdżonek. A great sportsman and hunter  - He's a new candidate for the PHA board so we'll ask him a couple of questions over Zoom. So see you next time and Darz Bór - One more thing. If you don't have an idea yet for a Christmas gift you can purchase a Gift Card to our online shop  - Online or paper version. Make sure to check it out on our site. Darz Bór  |||[Music] foreign thank you foreign foreign application foreign Corbin ations foreign Department [Music] foreign foreign foreign thank you Allah Hafiz [Music]|||Just 3 months after signing the contract, South Korea handed over to Poland the first 10 K2 Black Panther main battle tanks Based on the first execution agreement signed in August, Poland is to receive 180 K2 main battle tanks by the year 2025 while another 820 will be produced domestically by Poland South Korea and Poland in August 2022 signed a huge defense agreement worth 14.5 billion USD In addition to the FA-50 fighter or the K9 self-propelled howitzer, the most notable are 1,000 K2 Black Panther tanks According to information published on November 6, 2022 the Korean manufacturer has delivered the first batch of 24 K9PL self-propelled guns nicknamed "Thunder"  and 10 K2 Black Panther tanks to the Polish armed forces The handover of a significant number of tanks and self-propelled guns to partners after only 3 months of signing shows that the potential of the Korean defense technology industry is very respectable. It is known that the Korean-made K2 Black Panther tank is being evaluated as the "king of tanks" in Asia, considering all the criteria overall In 1995, the Korea Defense Development Agency was tasked with developing a modern armored fighting vehicle using advanced domestic technologies, bearing the designation K2 Black Panther using advanced domestic technologies, bearing the designation K2 Black Panther The K2 uses both modular composite armor of undisclosed type and Explosive Reactive Armor blocks It is claimed that front armor withstands direct hits from 120 mm tank rounds, fired from L55 guns The Black Panther tank is also completed with an active protection system and countermeasures system The tank is also completed with an NBC protection system The main weapon of the K2 is a Rheinmetall 120 mm/L55 smoothbore gun, which is license-produced in South Korea The K2 is completed with an automatic loader This MBT has a maximum rate of fire in 15 rounds per minute It is worth mentioning that autoloader's is similar to that, used on the French Leclerc main battle tank A total of 16 rounds are stored in the autoloader. Remaining 24 rounds are stored inside the hull It also has a very advanced fire control system, allowing to track and engage not only the main battle tanks, but low-flying helicopters as well Maximum effective range of fire is up to 10 kilometers Furthermore its fire control system can spot, track and fire automatically at visible vehicle-size targets  without needing any input from a human operator Mass production began in 2013 and the first K2s were deployed in June 2014 K2 tank is equipped with a MTU MT-883 Ka-501 diesel engine, 12 cylinders, water-cooled with a capacity of 1,500 horsepower and automatic transmission Thanks to this engine, the vehicle can reach a maximum road speed of 75 km/h and 50 km/h when off road, with a range of about 400 km Other features of the K2 tank include digital battlefield management system and navigation system for rapid coordination The K2 can rapidly report combat situation, thus increasing situational awareness of friendly forces The K2 Black Panther has a state-of-the-art semi-active hydropneumatic suspension Every boogie wheel can be individually controlled, allowing this MBT to "sit", "stand", "kneel" or to "lean" in any direction K2 combines many advantages of both Russian and American tanks It has advanced combat management system, automatic loader, active self-defense system navigation system, semi-active suspension, NBC protection system and so on With its extremely advanced features, it is easy to understand why Korea's K2 Black Panther main battle tank has a unit price of up to $ 8.5 million / unit  even after entering mass production In addition to South Korea and Poland, Egypt and Norway are also planning to order this tank|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||how many refugees has Poland taken zero and you're proud of that if you are asking me about Muslims illegal immigration none not even one will come to Poland not even one if it's illegal because this is what we promise this is what our people expecting from our government that's number one this is why our government was elected this is why Poland is so safe this is the reason why we had not even one terrorist attack look at the streets in Poland and we can be called populist nationalist racist I don't care I care about my family and about my country|||- Darz Bór and welcome to another video, straight from the Bystrzyckie mountains - Are we in night mode or.. - Yes, it's a bit dark. - It'll be brighter by the second  - This isn't our first snow of the year. Congrats to our friend Zbyszek for the doe dublet he did a week ago  - Our chief gently reminded me that stag hunting is nice but we need to fill the doe plan. That's our goal for today  - I do have 2 more stags to get. Besides that the wild boars and predators. The aura is amazing, perfect blanket of snow over the hill  - We'll take a stroll thru a this huge chunk of forest to try our luck - Later on we'll bring back the doe hunting topic as well. For our rifle we have my 9  - I'm liking it even more recently. Here in the mountains the animal can't run off after the standard shot  - You need to keep it in place, often there's no roads. A bad shot won't do it even with a 9 - Compared to a 308, the 9 does keep the deer in place. Let's start our walk, we'll fly out the drone on our way  - The aura is just beautiful with a slight northern wind  - I'm expecting more game coming from the left side, returning to the forest - We're walking really slowly because it just stopped snowing  - I like to check the exact weather conditions on the Meteo.pl site. It's very precise - That's why I know to look under my feet as well to find a very fresh track like this. We may meet them  - You have to read the forest, look on the ground. This is an obvious signs of doe and a fawn track  - Now we'll go even lower, constantly looking side to side  - A pack of boars walked thru here, it snowed over it so it's not as fresh. Surely from this morning, walking from the left - The game movement is still pretty low  - They ran off. Must have stayed to the left, I've heard a branch crack  - A female with a kid walked 150 m away to the right. At least we've seen one  - That's how a fresh track looks like. We'll move 200-300 m further and come back the same way - I had other plans but the movement is so low. This isn't the first snow when the game becomes stagnant  - They have to adjust first, especially deer. It's weird that I don't see many deer signs now  -  We saw one fresh track of a couple deer and a 1 hour old line. Now we caught that doe - We managed to record them. There's no movement here, there may be some later because it takes them some time to hike up  - I think that the boars already walked thru, I don't know exactly. The deer may still come so I'll move a bit further - I've decided to follow our line back and see if anything crossed it after an 1,5 hours. This is their window of walking - If the lines appear we'll come back. I'll visit this place either way because I know my district and the game behavior  - They just have to adjust to the ''first'' snow. Let's move - We're late yet again. Two boars around 50 kg walked from the left and crossed thru here. It's fresh  - Going against the ''empty feeder'' comments..As you can see they're huge  - A whole wagon of hay fits in. In the last 6-7 years we did feed the wild game but only when they need it  - Not with this little snow and small frost. Instead we have around 30 hectares of fields that we manage and use for this puprose - Mostly clover fields that we turn into haylage bales. I would say around 150 bales weighting 500-600 kg  - The feeders you see right here are common. Every single one has it's manager who comes and add the bale if needed  - We also add the salt blocks. The salt is out all year long, very well seasoned hunting grounds  - We do not hunt near feeders so even if we saw something, we can't shoot. Only foxes - Now let's go and check if something went over our steps  - We looked over a big chunk of land and nothing. Some other signs but absolutely non where we went  - This means that the game is a bit unsure of the snow and doesn't move around. They need 2 days more  - We'll be back. We have a bit of walking to our car so still a chance  - And the hunt is over. I don't want to go back yet with this amazing snowy aura  - With no game movement it's pointless. Some single lines in the busiest areas. I think they just can't get used to the snow, hiding away  - We did see that doe so the hunt was a success. The lines we saw thru the forest are a good indicator that we chose a good spot - We'll be back in one day, it's supposed to snow even harder. Going back we'll check one more place to see if they stayed there  - Now there'll be a interview portion of the video about the future of the Polish Hunting Association  - We were supposed to hunt together with Marcin but the timing wasn't right. The 600 km distance prevent us from doing so  - I'm sure you know who I'm talking about, Marcin Możdżonek. A great sportsman and hunter  - He's a new candidate for the PHA board so we'll ask him a couple of questions over Zoom. So see you next time and Darz Bór - One more thing. If you don't have an idea yet for a Christmas gift you can purchase a Gift Card to our online shop  - Online or paper version. Make sure to check it out on our site. Darz Bór  |||Alright so, today we're out here in Warsaw, Poland. [Music] It is a beautiful country, but it's pretty
cold out today so, I'll tell you guys a little bit about Warsaw. Warsaw is the sixth largest city in the European Union at about a little... under 2 million people 3.1 million in the whole metropolitan area. 
Alright it was founded... in the 13th century, so you can see a lot of old school Eastern European Vibes here. So let's take a walk around, I will say that the architecture is very, very unique here, right. So let's like, let's take a look. I'm actually staying at the Radisson collection Hotel first... time I stayed in one of those. It's really, really nice. We're gonna find some food this morning, we do have a train for a train to catch it about 2:30 to uh Ukraine, yeah... that guy's out there cleaning look at that.
We only have a couple hours, we're just gonna do a... quick little video here, we're gonna come back next summer though, we definitely need to come... back next summer um. I'm gonna come back and do Eastern Europe and just kind of backpack... around for a while, which way should we go, we'll go that way. Actually let's go towards... the historical building.
There was a building that was a gift from Russia long, long time ago. Dang! It's cold I was complaining about Bogota, yeah, we're out here figured; Why not... explore a little bit. I could either stay in bed and stay warm or walk around and see what... we have. I know, I'm hungry. We need to get some traditional Polish food.  Let's see if we can catch this green light, make it across, oh that's
cool! Got the tram, I know those are shut down in ...
in Ukraine right now to save power. Maybe check out some nice coffee, local coffee. There's a coffee house. Yeah! This is definitely unique, you can tell the whole that it's very...  European, but at the same time it's definitely got that different Flair of Eastern Europe. Got JP Morgan here. They have a restaurant over here called "Mamacita", that's kind of funny. Got Mamacita. It's a coffee house, that's cool. Definitely should have broke out the gloves. We've got Brooklyn, I'm guessing that's a bar. What's really cool about this place is how you've got extremely, high-tech, new buildings... with uh random old buildings thrown in then middle. Oh that's cool!
"Bank of Santander" that's... actually, I think it's out of Colombia. It's where my ex-girlfriend's from, we know how that rolls. "Bucaramanga". See you've got brand new high-tech and then old school European... mixed together. Uh, we've got some graffiti going on. So I'm guessing that's down to the... subway. I got a vape shop. Pizza house. So I mean like old school mixed-in with brand new... cafe, let's get a coffee. Body world's vital.
I know bodybuilding's huge. Oh there's the Clock Tower. Let's go check... out the clock tower first and then we'll come back for a coffee. Yeah, that is one of the most beautiful clock towers I've seen. I think that's the one that has the observation deck on the 34th floor.  That's the funniest thing about traveling, because everyone's got
their own way of dressing in each country. I always dressed the way I want, never really change it. Oh "Pad thai", okay.  So, this must be the, the Asian Middle Eastern Area here, because
we've got: Thai food, Chinese food... um Middle Eastern food. This is crazy. We've got food from... Heck yeah, let's go check that building out.
"Alcohole". So, what happens when you drink, sometimes you fall in that hole. Wow, that guy's got my old car! That's neat. Yeah, that's the building we're
gonna go check out right now. Alright let's... walk over there.
So we're over here, we're almost
at the building I was looking for and I found... this cool little bar: "Pijama Wisnia". So, this looks neat I like how they put the bottles... up and put a little light around it. So, it kind of shines through people like the smoke out here I've already noticed that a lot.  People love the smoke, but yeah. So, let's check this out guys, this is like a little... dog park, out in front of this amazing building.
This is beautiful, look at this. Like I said... you've got old school buildings mixed in with brand new modern buildings. So this is pretty... neat, this is one of the things that I was
really excited about coming to Eastern Europe... and I'm excited, definitely about next year
because this I mean this is only a couple... hours for us to go check out of the hotel. Beyond that we are going to uh, come back next... summer explore: Moldova, Polonia... Albania, Georgia, a bunch of the former Eastern European countries, just uh, give it the time. and exploration it is definitely do. This is a beautiful part of the world. We're here near, where they do all this construction. They've got basically, uh posters up everywhere. Got Sam Smith... Ellie Goulding, the kid Leroy for the orange Warsaw Festival... The 1975, Emily Ratajkowski. I think she's from here isn't she?
[Music] [Music] [Music] Let's go buy our tickets to go look at the viewing deck here in Warsaw. Alright, so we came out here. We are at the 30th floor of the Terrace so, this building... is the building of culture basically and you can pay 25 zloty... which is 5.80 U.S, 5.80 U.S with the current exchange rate today and then you can go...  all the way up to the top and these are some of the views that you get. So you, they have these... on. I love how they do this where people put their love and stuff together. There's the river, I don't like how they have this but I understand why, safety. I guess in Colombia... I'm used to not having it. You just expected not to fall. Oh, my hotel's right over here. I'm staying at the Radisson... collection hotel. By the way guys, the Radisson collection hotel is really nice. Normally I... do hostels but, after a long plane flight, I wanted to enjoy myself and have a comfy sleep... so. Oh there's a football stadium by the way... for the Polish team, McDonald's but yeah, this is cool. So this is a and you can walk.  It's kind of like a Skyline View and you can walk all the way around. People have signed it... put their phone numbers. Got Birds up here. "Warszawa History". But this is kind of cool, you know I saw this on another video and it's just kind of nice. Ohh I need to go check this out, the famous statue... "Mermaid" used to, um, it's basically a famous mermaid statue. This is just like going to a baseball game, where you've got the the Nets. About three million people in the metro area. About 2 million... for the whole, for the actual city, city. 
Sixth largest city in the EU. I don't like this coverage, I understand why they do it but... that's the one thing I've noticed guys, it's always because of dumb people that they have... to make stuff like this. Any rules has been created, has been created because someone screwed up. It's usually the case. Oh there's always that one person dude. Always that one person, "Pat here for good luck". Always like good luck. I'm guessing that's the palace maybe, that's the presidential Palace... right here, I'm not sure, I need to do some more research. Everyone puts their IG's up here, anything to get views. Make sure you guys follow my... IG: @armyguytravels, we'll just do it that
way. I'm not gonna, I'm not writing up here... but yeah, so you you show up to the back side over near theater six um, there's actually... a bunch of different exit or entrances to
this complex so, there it's huge, so you have... to enter on the um the "Pałac Kultury i Nauki" that area, that's the one you enter there should... be two coffee houses right when you enter the front door, you walk in and there's a coffee... house on the right and left, that's how you know that, that's the one you enter to buy... your tickets, otherwise you can't get in on the other side.  Oh it's cold! See look just look how different, this is definitely Eastern Europe guys, look at that. Actually... this is pretty cool. I think I'll do that for each side so you
guys get a view, just come up to the, the windows and... Alright, so we just made it down from
the 30th floor, that was fun, the views were... phenomenal. I definitely need to come back and check this place out I mean but.  So, we were all the way up there. It's a shame we have to go back and check out in an hour. From the hotel and then, I'm only gonna have another two hours left after that.  So that kind of sucks. But definitely more of a reason to come back. Alright, so this is cool guys. So this is
Tim Etchell's: All the things (2020), so it says... All the things, you guys can barely see because it's not lit up. All the things that... could happen next. That's the thing you guys have to understand, you have to do things for the great things... to occur. So this is kind of cool. Polish is so confusing, by the way. I think it's neat, but I don't understand it. Uh, why did I come to this side? This is bad, oh, that's cool.
It's like rubber tiling. I played tennis on... this in high school, down in Green Township, Ohio. They have a court and we had to go play... our high school match there and it was on this rubbery crap. It's really difficult to... play on but, it's good for maintenance see. The ball bounces and skips really bad. Everyone's walking from their "airbnbs"... to uh, the train station which is behind us. Wow, that church is cool. Alright, let's cross over. Alright, Little Hooker, Hooker advertisement. That's funny, right in front of the church... that's messed up. Give that to a friend as a gift. "Figura Chrystusa", oh it's Jesus, yeah I love churches.  Churches are some of the coolest architecture because the Catholic Church used to spend a lot of... money, a lot, a lot of money. That's cool. I love this. Old, it's like old school mixed
with new school, you can see how warm the buildings... are there but then brand new. This is neat. It just had a weed vending machine, that's wild.
[Music] [Music] [Music] [Music] [Music] [Music] [Music] We're here in the old town, getting ready. Yeah I picked up a, a Ukraine hoodie.  My head gets cold here anyway so. But yeah this is the old town. We're gonna walk for about five or ten minutes... and then I've got to go pick up my
bags and head to the train station, but yeah. Check out this architecture, this is the old town, it's really, really pretty. Uh, how you doin'? It's another lovely place. Oh, okay. So, these were the ones that the lady at the hotel told me about. We just ate at this one... and that is the other one. When I come back in two weeks, I'm definitely gonna have to come check this place out.  Yeah, it's got a different vibe here in the old town. Definitely a different vibe. So the one thing you're gonna notice here, they have terrace or terraces everywhere, so... all the buildings, they'll charge you a little bit of money, not much usually and you can.. go up top, so if you look up there there's
a terrace. If you see t-a-r-e-s, you'll see... them everywhere here, so they're monetizing it which is really smart actually.  Um, you can go up top and uh, check out the views from wherever you are. Oh yes, I need to get one of these when I come back. It's like their Pizza, like polish Pizza. Got garlic sauce, mushrooms, I'm gonna get it without the mushrooms obviously but... I will say the one thing that I... I think is kind of cool, is how much the Polish people support the people of Ukraine, their neighbors... and you're out here at the old town, look at this guy. Well, I'm assuming it is. Look.
[Music] [Music] There's the football stadium, but yeah that's the old town, here. All this is considered the old town. But we're gonna walk back up, catch an Uber and we are on our way to Ukraine.
[Music] [Music] Alright guys. Signing off from
Poland and about to head to Ukraine.
[Music] [Music]|||To which countries is Poland most similar? 
in terms of total area we're not far behind   Malaysia. Population wise we've been 
somewhat similar to Canada for years,   but the influx of people from Ukraine has 
currently brought us closer to Afghanistan.   Our economy is doing well and is comparable 
to Argentina's. When it comes to average   earnings it's not extraordinary we can 
expect wages similar to lithuania's our   military is comparable to Spain's. Adherence 
to democratic principles brings us closer   to Surinama. Regarding healthcare we're 
somewhere between Sri Lanka and Uzbekistan|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||good morning peoples here from Poland where 
where are we again Nowogrod good morning so my perfect pronunciation for some reason 
was wrong so there you go that's east   close to the Belarusian border and there is one 
of the oldest or original forests in uh in Europe yeah she makes her own uh flower pot it's a cow time don pedro there we go still gotta get a shake in this 
this morning didn't have one last night after   brutal workout in the morning i feel it today 
like a mofo quads hamstring but the lady helped   me out she uh sorted me out with a jar try to 
explain shake shake shake here we go protein creatine protein Hussars saved Europe from the 
Ottomans when they were in Vienna   ottoman in Vienna Polish army gift the 
prime minister very nice heavy here   now i am the Polish the ultimate Polish fighter the winged hussars really dope right that is 
the great story the strong story of Poland all right ready to go to the forest forest time thank you hey let's go a little fuel up hello hanging in there it's easier to maintain heat today i got 
some of this semi-synthetic oil i don't   even need to measure atlas uh because 
it's done about 1500 kilometers now there you go one hell of a oil eater   i've been wanting to do this for a while 
and the last time it happened was in Andorra   i figured based on how it was last time the filter 
could use a clean in Poland you get free air again all right filters back in a rinse every now 
and then oiled up air filtered up fueled up right on the edge of that national park of 
that forest but we got a place for a few nights   all right here's some trees already i 
promise it's gonna be heaps more Pedro Speak a little German real apartment block older 
apartment block this time ah very nice old school on the outside new school on the inside living in a Polish block this time   this is for real it's not really good 
for my circadian rhythm but all right home sweet home it's a balcony this is the balcony and kitchen it's got everything locked 
hey what's going on is this   kind of special thing here this is the 
secret door uh oh you can't open it what's going on in there it's probably the man 
man waiting in there till we go to sleep so   yeah this one comes to down to about 37 
euros a night as you can see we are now   heading out there that's the name of this 
national park deeper into the dense forest   the first forest obstacle i would still be able 
would have been able to cross this with Atlas are you basking in the light oh you got your first guy 
his massive bump on your head   holy damn oh you're gonna get a 
bubble head put your hoodie back on blissful forest perfectly at peace in his zone 
and in his lane ah that was nice primeval forest here we are with the European bison i can't pronounce it i mean 
it's perfect pronunciation   these old wooden houses everywhere here reminds 
me a little bit of uh wooden houses in east Russia   and before entering Mongolia 
look at these wooden houses always nice to hit some of the back 
roads here wow this reminds me so much   of northeast Kazakhstan and Russia love 
to go back right about now we're about   two and a half kilometers from the Belarusian 
border very muddy from the day's rain with rock   hard tires ah remember the dirt folks faint 
memories so here this is the edge of Europe   of eastern Europe and to go keep going through 
here you would need sort of visa with Belarus   you can't do any uh any visa 
let's travel anymore from here   because this is uh where uh Schengen 
ends the internal borders of Europe they say the two military people standing there   i miss going to the other side 
no visa on arrival in Belarus i wonder if you actually can't cross the border 
here before i understand Belarus has strict uh   border crossing locations so you can only cross 
the border at certain locations so apparently   this national park used to be a tsarist hunting 
retreat palace burned down or was destroyed seems to be a lot of military 
activity going on convoys and whatnot going in and out looks like even an operations unit and again we are close to the Belarusian border 
here so i think this is the old old sar entry a palace entry you can see 
the makeshift tents inside that's all the military vans here what do you reckon this is Anastasia's playroom 
i find it interesting to come across this place   because of course you see tsar you think wait 
a sec what does that have to do with Poland   but it mostly has to do with Russia and more 
specifically the old Russian empire the one   that lasted until uh early 20th century it 
was massive reached all the way to Alaska   where Europe went colonizing all of Africa all 
of Asia all of south America and north America   away from their territories Russia when 
colonizing east all these territories   in the past that used to belong to khanates you 
know Genghis Khan even parts of China for a while   all the way into north America unbelievable 
they had the ease to colonize eastward but   westward they increasingly bordered Europe and 
then all the way into this region here in Poland   all Belarus all of the Baltics even 
Finland but it was massive only surpassed   by the British empire i'm not sure maybe the 
Mongol was bigger in the end different kind of   empire but those were the only two bigger empires 
and the British of course also had a very very   very big hand in world affairs you know let's say 
how people react to the United States nowadays   they would react to the United Kingdom but it's 
a fascinating thing to consider all these old   land borders and i say old relatively not even 
until that long ago give it 100 years 150 years   and of course as i mentioned before this was 
during a time when Poland didn't exist anymore   because it had been partitioned up to three times 
going to the German empire and i think yeah parts   to Russia and maybe even Austro Hungarian but 
i might be wrong there it was a crazy time   back then when massive powers were 
massive future industrial potential   we're vying for the future of Europe and 
therefore later in the world so got wooden   house here from that time it's where the 
tsar used to keep his dust bins and brooms no no not things you want to keep in a palace   really takes me back to 
Eurasia these wooden houses hello Nikolai open up don't worry no no it's not 
no Cheka don't worry it's okay i'm not Soviet and with that peak humor 
folks we conclude our arrival   in Białowieża let me know how to 
actually pronounce that take it easy   and i'll see you well i'm just gonna chill here uh 
on my bison ciao folks mine's called joe joe bison|||we all know the great colonial empires
of Britain France or Spain it was super trendy back in the day to
have colonies so basically everyone wanted some but do you know anything
about the colonial ventures of the Polish Lithuanian Commonwealth? The Polish nobility was very interested in these money machines but the kings were not
really keen of this idea so one dude with some money and enthusiasm decided
to act on his own this dude was Jakob Kettler, the Duke of
Courland and Semigallia. "Whaat, I thought we were talking about Poland?!" Yeah, but Courland was a puppet state and later part of the
PLC. So stop complaining it's close enough Anyway Jakob Kettler established
many trade relations with other Europeans and had one of the largest
merchant fleets in Europe with this fleet he sailed across the ocean to the
Caribbean as earlier 1637 just as a comparison by this time Canada the 13
colonies and Quebec were merely started and the new world still had lots of land
to offer their first working colony was New Courland on Tobago in 1639 but one
colony wasn't enough in 1651 Courland gained a few colonies around the gambia river. These
colonies were not a waste of time and money they exported many goods and even
some tropical birds. Sadly, the small Duchy couldn't  hold these colonies
for too long. when the duchie's defences were weakened by the Northern Wars and the
man who made it all possible was a captive of the swedish army. In 1664 they
were formally ceded to England Courland regained the island of Tobago of the
Treaty of Oliver in 1660 but it was abandoned at last six years later the
last effort of a colony in the Caribbean was on the island of Trinidad but the
dream was over and the colony was abandoned in 1690 this was the end of
the Couronian colonial empire and soon after the PLC was too busy fighting for
independence to care about colonies in 1882 another dude named Stefan Szolc-Rogoziński wanted to found a Polish colony, even though Poland was a puppet
state of the Russian Empire he did not have any permission to do such a thing
but that didn't stop him he led an expedition to Cameroon. This expedition
was a failure but surely he would have more success in a second expedition
right? Nope still no luck. A third expedition never
happened since he was busy being not life for the most part after 1896. After World War 1 Poland became independent again. And as every independent European
country, they wanted colonies. Sure, after not existing for hundreds of years
one needs colonies. Well it wasn't all that intense, again some influential
wealthy people wanted Poland to have colonies but the government not so much. By this point every corner of the world was already owned by someone so was proposed
that Poland buys territories in South America or Africa suggested were places
in Brazil Peru Angola Liberia and a few more. Most of the proposed places even
already had a Polish minority! Nothing ever really came from this idea due to
Poland being invaded. But imagine if the Polish government just bought a part of
another nation as some sort of colony would others do a similar thing? Maybe
this could have started another era of European empires and colonization. Spain
buying parts of its old Empire or Sweden buying a few Caribbean islands. Maybe
this comes in fashion in the future who knows however this is pretty much
everything I could find about the greatPolish colonial ventures I hope you enjoyed the video leave a like and subscribe for more. I am working on a few
things and they are almost finished so they should be up soonish, I hope at least|||Wszyscy cenimy swój czas, dlatego szukamy najlepszych rozwiązań,
by usprawnić i ułatwić naszą pracę.  Organizacjom pomaga w tym Microsoft PowerApps, będąc jedną z najbardziej wszechstronnych platform
do tworzenia aplikacji typu low-code na świecie!   W Sii pomożemy Ci stworzyć aplikację, która przetwarza informacje z dokumentów papierowych za pomocą technologii OCR, uczenia maszynowego i sztucznej inteligencji  aż trzy razy szybciej niż standardowe
rozwiązania dostępne na rynku.  Już teraz, używając swojego
telefonu lub tabletu, możesz pobierać dane z faktur, paragonów i zamówień dostawy z wiadomości e-mail lub przetwarzać dowolne informacje z formularzy papierowych za pomocą naszej aplikacji; cyfryzować dane i przechowywać w uporządkowanej bazie; oraz importować dane jednym kliknięciem
do dowolnego systemu docelowego, takiego jak ERP (WMS/TMS) lub system do zarządzania relacjami z klientem (CRM). Zakres przypadków dostosujemy
do regulaminu i specyfiki Twojej firmy!    Potrzebujesz ustandaryzowanych podpowiedzi dla pracowników? Nic prostszego!  Przepływ informacji w czasie rzeczywistym? Oczywiście!  Protokół z przyjęcia będzie przesłany elektronicznie zarówno dostawcy, jak i wewnętrznemu działowi kontroli jakości . Stworzymy dla Ciebie środowisko, w którym urządzenia mobilne pomogą nawet w najbardziej złożonych procesach biznesowych.  Jednocześnie wspieramy społeczną odpowiedzialność biznesu CSR i raportowanie ESG, ograniczając zużycie papierowych dokumentów.   Jeśli chcesz przekształcać swoje pomysły biznesowe w skuteczne rozwiązania w szybki sposób, skorzystaj z Microsoft PowerApps dzięki Sii.  |||music|||fore guy isn't blue different color blue I mean hingo [Music] uhhuh [Music] [Music] are we going to [Music] wait but I have a feeling maybe over there inside they have tables yeah can be only this area [Music] [Music] [Music] yeah [Music] so we just finished our lunch and came back to the car the thing was we had a voucher and I didn't R thoroughly th th thoroughly and they said we need a reservation prior two weeks in in advance and I didn't know of course I didn't I don't read things like that so but you've been reading it to me mhm maybe you didn't listen carefully it's your for and we were staying in the line so we didn't want to just give up on spot so we just had pasta it was expensive but it was okay the coffee was good the coffee was we are going to go to the weni park Park to feel the Autumn and enjoy this [Music] weather so we decided not going to the park because too many people no parking STS emergency so probably we're going to go to the Palace because this weather is not coming every day especially in Poland yeah so I think this is our last chance to fill the Autumn season with this swans don't say that okay we're going home now yes mhm because we lost hours son yeah it's been 4 hours [Music] something I [Music] Cofe can you say goodbye Papa Papa Papa saying like this because we read in [Music] Poland timing is not [Music] wor [Music]|||foreign [Music] I said stop so far [Music] [Music]|||this this is this is not this is Norah this is Norway this this is this is Norway this is Norway and this is Norway and Poland this this is this is an this is and this is Angie this this is this is Angelina this is Angelina Jordan this is Angelina Jordan singing this is Angelina Jordan singing
bohemian this is Angelina Jordan singing this is Angelina Jordan singing
Bohemian Rhapsody finish finished finish my finish my son finish my sentence finish my finish my sentence finish my sentence she finish my sentence she just finish my sentence she just
blows finish my sentence she just
blows me finish my sentence she just
blows me away I'm I'm not I'm mad imagine emergency imagine singing imagine sinking imagine something like imagine something like that imagine imagine something like imagine something like that imagine something like that in imagine something like that in
America's Got imagine something like that in
America's Got Talent or or The or this or or this or this is or this is from or this is from Poland or this is from Poland chest or this is from Poland this this is this is so this this is this is Sarah why wow wow to wow to Great wow to Great voices wow to Great voices what you got wow to Great voices what you got
let me know in the comments beauty beautiful|||I asked how he greases it and he said he drives it with a grease nipple and how much does this J cost? I have the impression that every 10 years I've seen a Sokół and the guy threw it away. I thought now that the price is gone and there's no need to talk about the straight teeth on the engine. It was made. I drove it . I drove it like that. [Music] wrong Hello, today is November 19, the last Motobazar in Poland, you could say it's almost winter, because today it was snowing here in Wrocław, it was raining. See, this is the weather, I'm going to see what's interesting there. We'll see, maybe we'll make one today, some two types of films that we will make such a report, there will probably be this report And there will also be a compilation with prices Let's see if there will be any motorcycles at all, enjoy watching if you are here for the first time, I invite you, I am interested in motorcycles and other antiques and funny things and here we go with the episode, first thing if you are going to the bazaar so you have to pay a ticket or The exchange here in Wrocław is probably PLN 30 I hope they haven't increased the price small queue I go from the back through the second gate less crowded Good morning hello good morning Good morning one ticket will be PLN 30 because you don't have one finer Well, I have a hundred , maybe it will be three tenners for one, 30, or 170, what's going on, sir, what are we, we already have over 1,500 people released Also definitely 100 20 and 50 still great Thanks, thanks, are there dates for next year or are there no dates for next year, next year it will be on March 3 March 3 303 Okay thanks Thanks Okay, we already know that on March 3 we can get ready for another bazaar and We're entering but the weather but the first plus is gone Stu's gone now it's calm and quiet so that's a big big plus for the organizer let's go see what's going on what's going on, there are signs with different parts Hello, what's going on in the alley, Nimbus, Nimbus, Oh man, it's cool, I asked him how he lubricates it, and he said he drives it with a grease nipple, and every 1000 he wasn't joking because he doesn't drive it, but it's interesting, it's cool, I just arrived, but the weather is hopeless, no, KSK, bard , noem that you will be there because I'm also watching you , but the bike is nice, pre-war tank, nice patent , how much does this jab cost? Do you know what the price is for this guy 14 ip 14 I5 o Look, listen, who I met here today at the market, peacock of hearts Oh hello, the same, the same with us, friends well, Paweł has a retr tractor, that's a good name, that's right, it was something for tractors, quite a bit, I have the impression that what I found here somewhere 10 years ago is now much smaller or much different, more parts are listed specifically as for tractors, back in the day they had to be shelled out you bought everything from motorcycles, you have promoted this hobby a bit, I think more and more people are interested in it and it is starting to become a competition but there are not enough tractors here, there is one Farmal standing on a tow truck but he has already gone to Ursus because of the hood. I found one, some light, even there are some lamps here, searchers, there are lamps, they were once wanted for motorcycles, there were different rubber bands, not always, it's always the problem, that there are a lot of accessories for old tractors, Polish ones, but not only that, they are the same elements. As for motorcycles, it's a problem because motorcycles are more popular and more and more popular. they value junk for motorcycles, that's why we suffer, tractor drivers always have these WFM SHL headlights, it's the same as usus teams, you glass, not glass, it's known that this, it's known that there were more people willing to buy motorcycle stuff than tractor stuff, once today, here are the lamps, I saw it somewhere, someone had it done to the ussa 25 for an astronomical price considering the old reality, PLN 2,000 for two, it's already there today, but it's all gone Top, not today, it still seems like astronomy, but it's hard to find it, what are we going to see, no, I'll try something here, too, put together such a car Oh, oh PLN 5 It's an art to dig something out Hello Hello Hello, it's your joint , you haven't sold it here yet [laughter] which Hello hello hello hello hello hello Hello, where were they fighting, did they bring the engine for this Sokół to the scrapyard, and the guy threw it away and his friend took it and put it on the ramp, that's not it The guests came to take care of you or, well, I know, a month of my time it wasn't Damn, but where was it in Lubań? Oh, it's a fart, but, but the topic, so what? And someone took it away, wrong way, and you don't know how much it went for, PLN 3 per kilo. Oh, my God, you don't have any photos, even if you don't, because you don't. it was like fuck and there are still some things Sometimes he inherits a garage, usually young people throw them away Oh my goodness, well, you just have to ride poz How much did you pay for the parts you bought in the Czech Republic something not in the Czech Republic this one I came today for the prices of motorcycles I'm here all the time with someone he's talking like this, how do you value it here, three, two here Oh my goodness, he knew who the product was going to be. The customer came. Well, I'll tell you that there is traffic, there is traffic, it's nice, because now you have an exhibition here, damn, it's not that loaded, so you say 5,000 , what's up? Is n't it Okay, I'm moving on, someone wanted this police station, you know, but no, but I don't think it's tenek milic [laughter] steaks, yes, I saw that such plates cost Yes , I'm moving on, for now, here's a price for 7 wheels [Music] I don't have to be careful how do I walk so that I don't say shit here? Oh my gosh, this mosquito is free. But the weather is so good , what's the price of this WFM 4 ipa, the price is good and it will wash off now, this price will wash off from the tank, this price will wash off from the tank, cool, pretty kyna 350 o And that's great Now you don't have to ask 1700 we have Cz CA already and you don't have to talk about it, the magnifying glass on it, the magnifying glass on the string , it fired 1400 Simpson just lost the piece of paper, I say, Simpson lost the piece of paper, a friend of mine introduced how much for DL, he painted the whole thing here, that's it the newer one is 2e, it has round ones, I had one like that, and here with a swing arm, it was great when it was driven, but it had one flaw, it had straight teeth instead of a chain, these Komar sprockets had these ones and they ran quietly, this one had straight ones, and when I added it, I tried to replace it, but it didn't work they walked so beautifully, they walked, you see, you can remember not some old times, the shop is open today, no, not today, not today, not today, not in Poznań, that's where I'd have to do it, just so that on Sunday, at least one, but bald on Sunday, you know, that's the day I 'm celebrating, but what's the price for the people, what's the price of the round, 3.5 to 3, damn it, it's so cheap, 25 liters of it I'm 25 years old, you have it And do you have any paper for it, why do you need paper? I'm just asking, you know, I'm asking for the sake of it, you see, they'll take it out of the barn now. The guys don't want to drive anymore, the engine was original, the Stomilowski tires are original, what can you buy from China ? Well, a year and a half, it's been flying in the sun and on tires for 20 years, but the engine was made 20 years ago, and 3 I5s, and hell, everyone still wants to bargain . it's funny, that's not true, the guy has 10,000, he wants it, no paperwork, now he has a lot of everything, everything is in his hand, originally, that's how I bought it. That's what I get when someone tells me, because I don't know. I bought it like that 25 years ago, I drove it, it's running, it starts now, did you try to start it or not today? it will start, but the platinum wires need to be cleaned. Wiz, how was it today, quickly, pulled out, thrown [__] to hell, sell it, sell it, no, it won't. Are you from Wrocław or somewhere else? Tyska, you see. Well, there are few people today, yes, you'd probably be this one, because the last time I saw that he was there there was one 3,000 I said 3,300 for you, damn it, but I have that ridiculous money, no, no, no, now you know, it costs money to get it up to par. Listen, if you don't need money, then [ __ ] I came here to earn money, just to buy something, Zac, just go crazy. listen, do you pay for the entry ticket or two of us, when we arrive we have dy 148 PLN 40 in the back you are a whore and you are A yes, tear, back and forth, tear, will you buy something [__] tomorrow I will be on YouTube No, tomorrow yes, tomorrow maybe not, But wait, I'll give it to you and as you watch, but oh well, but the price is damn good, you see, it's a good price Well, you see, everyone, I say it, contact me because when I make an announcement, they will probably contact you, if I mean, I'll give the film No, I say If you put a chicken in the trunk for 3,500 NIK, he'll put a pile in it today you'll come in a passenger car, yes, put it in the trunk, wait, I'll take a photo. Clean the plates. 2 years ago, my boy was driving around the yard in this car. Today, 20 years ago, I was going to the store. It's hard now, but they were like that. I don't know how old you are, Kuźwa, because my temperature is 50 degrees Celsius, I think it's over there. Do you remember those times, what kind of driving was there, what Rami was driving, I don't remember, I don't remember, and those [ __ ] don't check today it's like you went away without insurance 7000 I'm going to kick you [ __ ] yes yes forget about insurance I got an A at the Provincial Administrative Court that's what I wanted at the Provincial Administrative Court for s I sold it later no and yes this one Good for now hello hello exactly OKE it's tar what the heck did you buy something? You're looking at the motorbike, it's cool, but there are already too many topics, damn, that's enough for now about The mosquito fires up and how much do you value it, the syringe is original because some of them don't have it Ok thanks for the 900 it's on the wsko mostly just the knob is black m I'm interested in it, that's something other collector's evidence , what is the price of Simpson and P ? Hello, what is the price of this MZ, do you know 3000, how much does this sson run [laughter]? Put it on the video you are watching That's it for me Well, it's a nice one, taken out of a shed, dusted with dust No, when I was young, I had complete knowledge about [ __ ] for a new one because it's already old, yes, and now it had the cover in this color, the original Zest store, everything is gone, but now you have to pay, not cool, GSX , green, but there are a lot of different meetings here, like a small stock exchange, it's cold today, but it's nice. Here are some I see the signs, the experimental station, the district committee , the Department of Economy, the entrance, Faia Street, there is none, hello, hello, hello, hello, good morning. Good morning, I'm looking at the signs here, but there's nothing. Unfortunately, this one was probably raped, oh, there was an advertisement, kindergarten. Oh my gosh, if someone watches from Germany, they'll remember it. maybe childhood Okay, I'm moving on because it's cold page Oh nice PKP, yeah Good morning, sir, good morning, Good morning, Oh hello, how's it going, okay, I'll go here and this one and take a look. Look, look how nice the PKP is. Nice, how long have you been there? Well, I'll tell you that's it We've been there for two hours because this friend is from the channel Remind me Mateusz Ratajczak Mateusz Ratajczak you can see there, I think he's the one from Toruń, I remember that you did it, because it's a bazaar, the first bazaar, that something is going on there Oh, and what is it, not a sensor Damn where is my friend here? There is also a lot here and what you have it for is to measure the sound intensity o Oh, is there a sonometer like that, if not exactly, PLN 75, it's nice because there are more and more prices and telephone numbers on motorbikes no also yes yes people watch it And that's why, you know, they don't see what 's going on They don't see what's going on and it's a very good improvement, nice present, I made these signs here, or you're drilling somewhere, what's great, Marcin Rider Well, wearing a jacket isn't much, thanks, thanks to you, somewhere in store You will install such nice ones No, wait, I think I have postcards today Thank you very much Okay, so you're going there, make some assessments, I see that the engine here is a bit of a mess, see No, because it's cold, Grzegorz, have you seen what I bought, do you remember these? See here the inscriptions inscriptions Lak siwucha I don't know, I'm too young for such bottles, so I don't remember, I don't know, man. I would like to remind you that hello, hello, the bottle is still available for return because no one came forward yesterday and I bought it for this purpose, but I don't know why, actually, I bought it and I'm adding it. attention to the bottle t map of Galicia map of Galicia maybe someone will find it useful Listen Mot Bazar Wrocław Older bazar first first episode mega information Listen, Grzesiu, do you feel that someone brought the Sokół 1000 engine to the scrapyard a month ago, where else, where else, I heard a story at the bazaar Wait. I'll turn on the lights here. Well, there are some numbers it's worth going to scrapyards, it's worth looking around somewhere No, Grzegorz and I are constantly searching , today is a day of kindness, so there's an appeal for you to be kind to yourself, to others, and in general, what's wrong Grzegorz, you're kind, every bottle you have, what do you see No, 62 yes or or 40 because it's 17 so January 52 but something else is written four four not April 52 but 17 But it's old because they can already see the inscriptions state monopoly of spirits shipping pays shipping whoever writes the first comment there will get such a bottle sins outfit I have for you because Kamila left because Kamila left and she also has a great outfit I saw it today I'll tell you that the firecracker will go somewhere tomorrow pay attention can you hear it Can you hear those bells the outfit came Well because Santa Claus is visiting us tomorrow Grzegorz you have to see if this one Wait a minute we'll see We'll be back soon Grzegorz will check C it will be good for him leggings we still need leggings so you already think there were no leggings unfortunately the cap works You sir I'll drown in the hat You great oh the cap on the cap the cap is great but nice but nice wait a year ago we also had this St. Nicholas Day campaign, you need to find some green pants, you don't have any green ones, I have to see them, I don't have them, I should either go to this store, because we have a nice store here, I 'll go today, then you have to See if that's okay, just a sweatshirt, okay, let's do it, put on the glasses , okay We won't reveal more because more will happen tomorrow, we have to pack this one, prepare some parcels, no, and we'll see something, because I want them here, I have some parts and there will be episodes when we get back, because we're leaving for a week on Friday, I'm not sure if there will be internet, they will be there and is it possible to post vlogs every day but maybe it'll be great if it works, then this one No, if you like me, we have to do something like that tomorrow, we'll do this one, so look out for tomorrow, there will be a special video I don't care about something black, something like that, I guess it's inappropriate to heat it in the winter, it's cold cooling I have one, it would be good to wipe it down somehow, it's a bit dusty. We'll find out then, but it's sold. Oh, we need to check the battery. Is it charged, and we'll start it up here to make sure it's this one, and maybe we'll do a drive here, burning rubber, and what's the point, because I want to see what kind it is. is the mileage because I don't remember what the exact mileage is, I'm going to get the meter and maybe we'll check it with a meter, this isn't the measurement, we'll take it, we'll put it in, the operation is in progress, a scalpel is needed, or Wait, but the screws where do you remember, uu, there are only three of them now. We'll see soon what it will be like. will it start or will it not start, ladies and gentlemen, I got this cleaning agent in Łódź, you know, Gold, do you know anything about this episode of Gold Expert, I wonder what it's like, it's also for the paint, where it was shining, it's so nice not to sit there and do something, but there's no time for it too many topics , it didn't remove all the varnish, the agent doesn't clean it without interrupting your sleep, mś will check if we can connect it at most inside no. If not, because it was probably there once, but I don't remember how long it has been there, a friend of mine spotted it in the movies for quite a long time. because we didn't put it on display Because Mariusz didn't drive it all the time Mariusz says that he drives this Road King best, it's a 2011 103 cm and it's supposed to be nice, this one here but the steering wheel doesn't work Oh you, it cleans nice, look how it lights up such classes such classes there will be some space for some projects because this is not where the Sokół will be located in this room, Grzesiu, we have to start with this, we will have to start with this, but probably after the New Year, not with the topic of the Sokół and the workshop, these tools will have to be done we need to write down the tools. Mo hopsi, maybe one of you would like to help us write down the tools because we have to prepare a list of what we want from the company, how is it working? Wait, it's working at 33 318 from 33.00 . peaki ij battery Yes, it was charged , but you have to connect it, unfortunately, it was charged, but already half a year ago, unfortunately, the equipment is not working, so it looks like this later, it also looks a bit under I cleaned it, the battery is charging Tomorrow we will burn it, today we won't make it in time, it shines nicely, it glows nicely, this is how it works he calls the fluid, it works , it works fine, it goes well You don't have to rub it hard so I just don't know how it compares to others, it's OK who's from England who's from England who's from England, if anyone's from England, please let me know because Adrian is looking for some contact information there, he's looking for it O someone is calling and here two sweatshirts are flying for Adrian my grandmother rides a motorcycle my mother a banner it will fly soon look here everything is in order how many places there are now there are boxes there are even baubles here Oh there are baubles here Look seven tenners costs a harle bauble what does she have here something like this Look here there is a Gnome on a tank on a tank it probably costs PLN 120 and there is also a Gnome with a candle it costs PLN it costs PLN original Harley baubles and here is another bauble but there is here inside attention attention attention here there is a Bomb but this one is great but this one is [Music] it's cool, the dark room needs to make some better light Look what a nice little bomb, it must cost a hundred and a half, ladies and gentlemen, these are not cheap things Ok, I'll give it to you for nothing, there are so many of these harle gadgets, here we are poor, no Compared to this, sometimes something appears, there is some kind of bauble, but it is a pseudo-motorcycle, not a motorcycle, so it's the other way around, I have to put it in the wrong way, and in the United States it's just sometimes when I look at what's going on there, there 's a lot of it on the shelf, let it wait for better times. Oh, my friend the goblin said he wanted a sweatshirt, so I'm going to the goblin for the last meal, but I'm still collecting something for him. I'm also collecting something for him. it was something bigger for this one, because now to send something to England, no, it's not an easy matter. Listen, Grzeg, do we still have a pair of these tas tablets or not? Was it the last one that was gone? Today we have to look through this one. We have it, but I don't know if it's the sauce. but or not Paranormal, well, sometimes there are Parks, sometimes someone wishes that they want a pair for a car or something and but but we send this one every day, okay, I'm saying goodbye to you slowly because I have to put this video together, hold on until the next episode, there will be something tomorrow tomorrow is Wednesday, I don't know what we'll do, whether it'll be the United States or something, I'm sure it'll be out tomorrow because I need to make some movies now, no. Well, actually, I'm still adding movies every day, so I just don't know what about next year, God, next week, Jesus, I'm still confused. Not too much anymore on your mind Remember Listen to the activity to leave a paw to leave a subscription Or if you are already subscribed, press the bell to be notified about all the videos and films that may appear here soon, keep it up, hello at the end Listen, let me advertise my lovely, lovely shop, motozloty .com If you are looking for a gift idea for yourself, for a loved one, for a man, for a husband, for a boy, for a grandfather, an uncle, a grandmother, an uncle, you have come to the perfect place. Visit the website motozloty.com and there you will find millions of ideas for gifts, patches, pins, signs, sheet metal. We have a lot of them there. in the description you have a discount code from PLN 100 free shipping I will be glad if you come to me [Music] [Applause] [Music] hey|||>> DUTCH VOTERS HAVE HANDED THE FAR-RIGHT A LANDSLIDE VICTORY AFTER THE POPULIST -- AND HIS PARTY POTENTIALLY CUT FOOLISH IN GOVERNMENT. THEY WON THE LARGEST NUMBER OF VOTES AND SEATS IN THE NATIONAL ELECTION. >> HE'S OFTEN CALLED A DUTCH DONALD TRUMP. HE'S VOCALLY ANTI EU, HAS VOWED TO HALT ALL IMMIGRATION, AND STOP THE REMAINING -- TO UKRAINE. >> WE WILL MAKE SURE THAT THE NETHERLANDS WILL BE FOR THE DUTCH PEOPLE AGAIN. WE WILL RESTRICT THIS ASYLUM AND TSUNAMI AND MIGRATION. PEOPLE HAVE MORE MONEY IN THEIR WALLETS AGAIN. >> ANNA STEWART IS WITH ME, NOBODY CAN BE UNDER ANY DOUBT WHAT GARRETVILLE DOERS STANDS FOR IN THE WAY HE'S DONE IT. BUT THE NUMBER OF VOTES HE GOT, THE NUMBER OF SEATS HE'S GOTTEN PARLIAMENT, IT'S QUITE CLEAR. >> MORE THAN 2 MILLION PEOPLE VOTED FOR HIM AND HIS FREEDOM PARTY, HE'S GOT NEARLY 25% OF THE SEATS IN PARLIAMENT, AND SO THIS IS GOING TO BE THE BIG THORNY QUESTION FOR THE OTHER PARTIES WHO HAVE DONE MUCH LESS WELL I, HAVE TO SAY. WILL THEY GO INTO COALITION WITH THIS PARTY? BECAUSE ON THE ONE HAND THEY'VE ALWAYS SAID THAT THEY WOULD NOT, BUT ON THE OTHER HAND, THEY HAVE TO OF COURSE RESPECT THAT A HUGE PORTION OF THE POPULATION OF THE NETHERLANDS HAVE VOTED FOR THIS MAN, THEY VOTED ESSENTIALLY LARGELY ON IMMIGRATION, HERE. >> ANNA STEWART, WE'RE GRATEFUL. I WANT TO -- BEG YOUR PARDON, I THOUGHT WE WERE MOVING ON. AND AS, STAY WITH ME. DON'T GO AWAY, ANNA. THERE ARE TWO -- I IS WHETHER, FALLING FROM WHATEVER YOU SAID, -- WHETHER ANYONE GOES INTO A COALITION WITH HIM AND HIS PARTY. THE SECOND, AND PERHAPS THE COROLLARY TO THAT, IS WHETHER THEY COULD, AMONGST THEMSELVES, DESPERATE PARTIES, COBBLE TOGETHER A COALITION THAT WOULD DEFEAT HIM. >> AND THEY'RE PROBABLY ALL THINKING AND TALKING ABOUT THOSE TWO SCENARIOS RIGHT NOW. CLEARLY, THE FIRST SCENARIO IS THAT THEY HAVE TO AT LEAST, ON THE FACE OF IT, TRY AND SEE WHETHER THEY CAN FORM A COALITION WITH THE PARTY THAT HAS WON THE MOST VOTES. I THINK THE SECOND LARGEST PARTY THAT'S WON HERE, WHICH IS THE GREEN LABOR ALLIANCE, HAVE FIRMLY SAID THEY WILL NEVER GO INTO GOVERNMENT WITH BRETT VILLE THERE'S, AND I THINK THEY WILL MAINTAIN THAT. SLIGHT SOFTENING OF THE OUTGOING CONSERVATIVE PARTY, ALSO A CENTRIST PARTY, WITH THOSE THEY WILL GET 81 SEATS, THAT WOULD BE A MAJORITY IN PARLIAMENT, SO THAT IS POSSIBLE. THESE NEGOTIATIONS WILL LIKELY TAKE MONTHS, AND THEY WILL HAVE TO BE A SERIOUS NEGOTIATION WITH KURT VILLAGERS, PARTICULARLY OVER SOME OF HIS STANCES, FOR INSTANCE ON THE EU, HE'S VERY ANTI EU, SO HE WOULD EVEN LIKE TO SEE A REFERENDUM. THOSE NEGOTIATIONS WOULD BE REALLY TRICKY, AND REALLY WATERED DOWN THOSE POLICIES THAT SO MANY PEOPLE, PERHAPS, HAVE VOTED FOR. >> IN BRUSSELS THIS IS A NIGHTMARE ISN'T IT'S, WE HAD A LITTLE BIT OF THAT IN POLAND, -- I'M NOT TALKING ABOUT LAST ELECTION, AND TALK ABOUT EARLY ELECTIONS, AND WE'VE HAD A BIT OF IT IN HUNGARY, SLOVAKIA, BUT NOW THE FOXES IN THE CHICKEN HOUSE. >> I THINK THIS WILL BE A BIG CONCERN, -- EU PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS, AND ALREADY -- RULE MURRAY IN THE PEN COULD BE DOING RATHER WELL THERE. AND THAT COULD HAVE A SEISMIC SHIFT, REALLY, FOR THE EU, SO THIS IS CERTAINLY A WARNING SHOT, PERHAPS GOVERNMENTS IN EUROPE NEED TO TAKE THE FACTS THAT IN INFLATION, COST OF LIVING CRISIS, AND INFLATION ARE REALLY HOT TOPICS THEY NEED TO GRAPPLE WITH. >> ANNA, I'M GRATEFUL, ANNA|||summer had come to an end November came and with that the colors had [Music] changed from time to time the sun makes the leaves more [Music] golden the days became short morning's colder and frostier night's longer and the stars [Music] brighter the magic of the forest at that time is created by the leaves falling down and the trees moving with the strong wind [Music] yes [Music] this is what Autumn feels like it feels like long road trips morning walks in the forest endless seding for mushrooms playing guitar with your cold hands rain rain and more rain [Music] like some oh he really doesn't [Music] shough it's more than he can [Applause] [Music] handle life is anything but fair life is anything but [Music] [Applause] [Music] oh just as soon as they turn on there and when the sun sets at 400 p.m. and the Night Comes the only visible thing is deep on fire burning in the distance it's the time when everything is quiet except for the laughter and [Music] music and after some time night becomes comforting the Stars looking down at us patiently waiting for the first [Music] snow [Music]|||Hey! All thanks to Residence Angels 
I got my residency card. Really   appreciate them! They are without 
a plan intended a true God sent.|||we don't really piss each other off that much do we well I play Zula so you do piss me off is an astonishing tempestuous Love Story spans an extraordinary period in political history it centers around a Pianist Victor and singer Zula who have wild and often toxic Romance but it's also love for the culture love of the folklore of the songs I think the music takes it on that Journey we've got the magic of Elvis castello's music I don't know a musical that's been crafted like this and the richness of this cast in their experience and skill set and diversity this been so nice being in a room with Eastern European people to sort of go into things that maybe I've only ever discussed with my family this means so much to me because it's just such a big part of me vibrancy of it I think will really come through which is very different to the film it's [Music] pretty|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||up now i am arrive in oxford i leave documents   in the office and i need to wait a half of hour 
take documents change trailer and go to poland uh foreign field time so okay also here so fun foreign oh i love the chase in the hunt and i set the 
pace when i'm running i always take what i   want and i always give it 100 don't need 
a bank no i'm funded play the game like   it's nothing i'm always thankful for something 
don't take for granted stay humble now wake up   it's time to look at the enemy look in the 
mirror here's no friend of me it's not working   now maybe it's the chemistry it's time to 
break up so i can make a better me better   believe in your mind cause it's everything 
you can mold shame find almost anything   all it takes is some time and some clarity to 
find your identity it's mind over everything when i feel like this no i'm never turning back i you will never see me crack and if you 
get in my way you gonna feel the wrath   gotta say it to my face while he's looking back 
me for breaks after math when i hate i attack when i feel like this is foreign fun subscribe leave comments 
below see you in next video|||Hello everyone welcome to the beautiful Poland
I am your Rahul Solanki your favourite youtuber from Poland
If you are planning to come to Poland or you guys are already here in Poland
then this video is specially for you And my today's video can help you a lot
so we start with the sim card Which SIM card do you need to get after arriving
in Poland? You have to take the sim card, of the company
Lycamobile That's because we get monthly packages of
unlimited calls and sms in just 25 Pln And if the package is over, Lyca to lyca also
providers unlimited calls for lifetime Many elders in India do not have WhatsApp
So You Can Call Directly India With This Sim Card for 300mins in 25 Pln
And after getting the sim Card, it will be can find an apartment on your turn to find an apartment. And after the apartment we talk about basic
shopping like Tomato Onion Milk Yogurt normal vegetable from Poland and the groceries
we can get that from Biedronka As Biedronka is the Affordable brand available
everywhere in Poland And about our Indian groceries which will
not be available in the biedronka like garam masala, Indian spices- turmeric powder red
chilly haldiram snacks Okra, Green Chilli , Arbi Zucchini
You will get all these from Little India Biedronka will get you local grocery like
your soaps -laundry soap, washing machine soaps dishwasher soaps from biedronka and rest 
You will get Indian groceries from little India   What's available in Little India?
for that you can watch my little india video. link is provided in the description What you people have to do after taking Apartment,
you people have to apply for TRC card that is called residence card
Basically when you come to Poland from India you get 1 year visa or 6 months visa You cannot
renew that visa after it expires You will have to go India and get your visa
applied again so basically trc card is better than applying
for visa trc card have advantage and a disadvantage
disadvantage is that you cannot apply on your own you have to take consultant for that
and advantage is we will get 3 years residence card. because of the work permit which is
called umowa o praca you get 2-3 years minimum work permit and
same time for the residence card validity but we cannot apply for residence card directly,
you can if you know the language Since there is a lot going on in Ukraine because
of the war, there has been a problem in applying so I recommend to find a good consultant
give him his fees and make your work done by them as they know which documents are to
be signed, they will fill your complete details about your travel,skills. talking about the consultant
there are many fake consultant who will take your money and not apply for the card or
Will not reply to comments even if reply is received from the government
so in such cases I recommend a good agent that is IRESPECT which is in Wrocław city
he is an Indian brother support Indians so I recommend go and meet him, talk. i made a video for trc card you can also go
and watch that video And now we talk about driving license
Your Indian Driving License is valid for 6 months legally
and you can also get your International Driving License from India if you wish to drive after
6 months Whatever validity will be on your international driving licence that will be
only valid in tha poland If you want to get Polish driving license
You have to take test for that which is very easy in English language and
you can easily pass that exam You don't need to give practical for that
practical is only done if you do not have driving licence
if you have Indian driving licence than you just have to give theory test and you will
get your legal driving license If you like this video then share and like
it as much as possible and don't forget to subscribe to my channel|||foreign [Music] welcome back to my Channel today as you can see it's a beautiful sunny day so we are planning to go for a bicycle ride so let's cook this is the bike stand and we can rent bikes from here so we will show you the process how to rent the bike to rent the bike we need to scan this QR code using our app it's free for first 20 minutes app details will provide in description box [Music] so let's see how we can rent the bike to rent the bike you first need to scan this QR code using the app and then you will get option to open lock once it will be unlocked it's ready to go [Music] so now it's time to return the bike so you need to lock the bike and it will get returned thanks for watching and don't forget to like share and subscribe to my channel|||...sent ammunition to us, and who knows? Maybe this was the deciding factor of the battle in our favor. In 1939, you opened the borders for our soldiers who than escaped from the closing German and Soviet aggressors. In the west this made it possible to create the Polish army. You were always our friends. We will never leave you alone to fend for yourself. You can always count on Poland! In your most difficult moments! We will march together! Two countries that are founded on Christianity. We're both free and independent members of a united Europe. But together we take our thousand year-old Christian traditions into Europe. We will never let our traditions and our culture be taken away from us. Nor our freedom! We will not let them take it from us at any cost! God bless the Polish! God bless the Hungarians! Glory to the heroes of the revolution of 56! God bless the Hungarians, with your grace and bounty! Thank you very much!|||In this video,
we are still in the borderlands between Poland and the Czech Republic:
The Giant Mountains also known as Karkonosze. A two and a half hours'
drive away from Wroclaw Airport. We were based in the ski resort town called Szklarska Poreba,
where it's very easy to hike out of. But today I'll show you my solo hike
from the nearby village of Michalowice. A primeval forest trail leads you all the way up to the Wielki Szyszak area,
Smielec Pass, Labski Peak, and then something very surprising
on the border with Czechia. Stay tuned for that! And more
unspoiled nature on the way back. This episode documents my 17 kilometer
hike and won't feature any background music at all. Just the sounds of nature
with a little bit of my commentary. So turn up the volume,
switch the subtitles on, and enjoy. So today I'm hiking on my own to the Smielec Pass and Labski Peak,
and perhaps further if I have enough time. It's beautiful.
This forest is so primeval. It's just wild and quiet. And I've picked a trail which shouldn't be too popular, hopefully, and
that's my preference. This is my trail
up to the Smielec Pass. I'm pretty much in the riverbed,
but it's cool, I don't mind. I'm always captivated by being
just alone in the woods. It's crazy, but
there is so much magic to it and It's kind of like just a childhood thing,
rediscovering your innate origins or, I don't know,
just the beginning of everything, because this is just basic.
Me and the forest. So in these beautiful forests, there are no bears, there are no
wolves, but there's the lynx. And we also have here beautiful deers, obviously. Today there is supposed to be
a thunderstorm with hail forecast. Hopefully I don't get caught in it and I can enjoy the entirety
of this trail my entire schedule. There we've got snow. Here I am on the border between Poland / Czech Republic And this is the Smielec Pass. This is Wielki Szyszak. And that way we've got Sniezka. Nice.
I wish this trail was open. Sadly, I don't think it is,
so I can't go there. I'm just going to head over there. Hopefully the weather is OK. Beautiful lakes, ponds. And we're going to have to cross a patch
of snow, even though this is late May. But the weather here is crazy
and a thunderstorm is definitely brewing At the top of what I
think is Labski Szczyt. People seem to be confused. Everybody's asking me. Not everybody, but ...It's nice. It's a bit busier here because obviously people come from nearby peaks, and the
Czech Republic is just over there. I find it fascinating how
red the color of the grass here is. It's just like it looks burned,
but actually it's just because it was under the cover of snow for quite a while,
and so I think it hasn't regenerated yet. Let's continue. If I don't get soaked and caught up in the
thunderstorm, it's going to be a miracle, I think I'm glad it's not very busy. As I've told you before,
I love just going on my own. Or with Pato, obviously,
but I don't really like crowds. This is what we call
Wielki Szyszak up there. I don't know if you can see on the top of that mountain, Wielki Szyszak,
and the Czech Republic is behind me. Beautiful plains and hills
of the Czech Republic. But what I love the most
is this drop down here. These aren't high mountains. This is just about 1600 meters. Just under 1600 meters. They are actually quite a hike. They give you quite a hike. This is an old TV and radio station. On top of the mountain. This is like 1600 meters above the sea level. Look at this weather. Yeah, it looks beautiful. And to be honest with you,
I'm not sure if it's still operating. I will look into it. I just haven't had the time to check. Time for me to go...
to head back because this weather is a bit scary! I quite like the fact that there is
a sign with P for Poland in that direction. Cos I suppose I'm just now on the Czech Republic side, on the Czech side. Nice. There in the distance there's a nice trail as well to Szrenica. Szrenica is there. But I'm going to head this way. This is the Yellow Trail,
which is going to take me to the... ...the shelter under Labski Szczyt. Labski Peak. It says 30 minutes so that's cool. So I've just heard a thunder roll and I'm getting excited
about that because it's a bit scary. But it's beautiful, it's quiet. I just love it. Let's see what this journey brings. I'm now approaching the mountain shelter. Labski Szczyt. Under Labski Peak mountain shelter. It's nice. It's beautiful here. And into the forest I go. Have a look. There we are. Let's see how it's going to be this time. And I haven't got caught up in the rain or the thunderstorm yet, but it's
definitely brewing just above me. So I did get caught in the rain
eventually, but it's okay. Just making my way out of the forest. It's very, very thick. So that's the protection I have. I don't think I'm going to be soaking wet. Beautiful. Let's get out. This is the famous waterfall 'Szklarka' going to show you a bit more of it in a second because it's actually
mostly accessible from here. Show you in a sec. This is the waterfall
that I wanted to show you. It's called "Wodospad Szklarki". As a bonus. I'm just going to mention here that it just so happened that it was my father's
birthday and so I brought him out here as I knew that he would enjoy forest
walks and this beautiful scenery. This one, for example, is a short and very accessible
walk to the Szklarka waterfall. But in general, the Polish Karkonosze
do require a good level of fitness. It's useful to note here, though,
that the trails on the Czech side of the Karkanosze National Park are much
less steep and perhaps more suited to all. And for those who may not be able to walk or hike or trek for miles
and miles on end. There are several cable
cars to enjoy in this area. This one, for example, goes to the top
of Szrenica and it's super fun. And here we are in a place
called Golden View. As you can see, it's very busy, because it's one of those must see places. And thank you for watching our videos. Please, comment, like and subscribe as your engagement with us helps our channel grow. Thank you.|||hey yo what's up what's up today I will go
to visit Hungary especially visit for for Budapest the beautiful places and historical
about this place from Budapest and which is i will take train it's like from Krakow to
Budapest which is like a nine so it's almost 10 hours 30 minutes from there and then yeah
I'm so excited to visit Budapest because I've never been having before in there and I saw
a lot of videos about Budapest it's so very beautiful over there and then yep and before
to continue these videos I hope you guys already hit the button subscribe down below down below
let's go let's hit brother and its always support this channel to grow and it's always
support for me also to make more videos about the travel anything reviews about live in
Poland live hack in Poland like what I will make a lot of videos in these channels to
show you guys to educate you guys oh my God so before we go to there and are you ready and
we will meet on the train station let's go bye thank you [Music] we're going though you know what is the temperature right now
in Krakow for it this sounds recording is still good I mean we are going to huuhh.. I already used
double jacket  three jackets its pretty cold freeze so many people around going to go to work
at 29 and 30 December oh my God This Woman's Work is very fast hold
on maybe you will ask which woman that I tell that walk very fast here we go Yep this woman
walk very fast like a ninja just like this I'm tired well one kilogram ( camera & tripod ) damn this truck wanna  go to fight with Russian
I think damn oh my God no way I need to end these videos I need to
walk fast.. see you soon on the train station bye I think I need to buy the ticket..  and I just want to
remind you guys if you want to use public transportation in Poland like bus or Tramp
after you enter the bus you need to buy as soon as possible the ticket before the ticket
control will catch you then you need to pay 120 Zloty which is like 30 United States
dollar and I will put the price of the ticket in here and of course don't forget to validate the
tickets okay this the yellow box inside to the bus it's
a machine for validated tickets foreign now we are looking for food where we need to eat [Music] down huh where
we need to eat?   McDonald's do you want to eat something more so let's
go this is Galleria look what the heck is beautiful
in here so I don't know what we need to eat looking for food but I don't know what kind
of food that I need to eat in here foreign [Music] I don't understand with me [Music] I'm tired so we wait on the table just wait on the table
okay let's go we don't have much time  need to sit there and eat it [ __ ] [Music] first [Music] 15 minutes for eating
and I want to buy something in Mcdonald because
it's I want from mcd maybe the same things that we eat before [Music] I don't know so we just only have 15 minutes
keep it fast [Music] [Music] [Music] already [Music] try this salad [Music] foreign [Music] [Music] [Music] I don't know if it's mayonnaise [Music] like marinade look at this dude [Music] [Music] [Music] [Music] this is franchise sometimes can be different together sorry I will not show you because this is not content about review food [Music] [Music] [Music] bye so guys you'll still leave me
alone in here just only have 10 minutes I still want to
order yeah i looks like a cowboy in here Daddy chill damn what the hell is this [Music] okay I will
skip this video bye [Music] [Music] |||Hey, what you want? I know, I know that you missed me music...... music... Hello guys, welcome to my youtube channel Today's video is about very important information If you are planning to come to poland                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |||Hi, thanks for tuning in. Today, I’ll show you how to search for connections and buy tickets on Polish Railways network. Ticketing system has come a long way to make purchases simpler but there are still some flaws, especially for a foreigner, but I’m here to talk all about them. Let’s jump right into it. So, the traditional way of doing it would be to go to the station, look for the paper timetable available on pretty much every platform and look for the train you like. I agree, this isn’t very convenient and the information is also limited to show only the services stopping at the station, not ideal. At every sort-of busy station you can also find a ticket office, obviously, you could ask the person there about the connection you want to make. Assuming the employee knows English, you could easily get the information you want, but still it isn’t very convenient as you would still have to make a trip to the station. Of course, Internet is here to help with more than enough journey planners for your trip. Note, that I will be covering the rail part only, I don’t have enough experience with buses to talk about them. Back to the topic. The first website you would want to visit is Portal Pasażera. Let’s talk about everything other than the journey planner first. The least exciting function is poster timetables. Simply enter the name of the station and download a PDF file of what interests you. Useful when you don’t fancy a trip to the station, but limitations stay the same. Next up are delays and disruptions, quite self-explanatory. Different options do exactly what you may think they do. Worth to know, that they are available. My favorite option to use while looking up any potential delays is find a train. Even if you don’t remember its number, you can find it by displaying the departure board and clicking on it. So here we are, back on the home page. This journey planner can be used for all sorts of trips including international also it features all carriers, so it can be used for almost every trip you want to make. Using it is pretty straight-forward, simply fill out the form and click search, Direct connections checkbox might be selected by default, be aware that some connections might not be possible without a transfer. These are our search results. A side note, a passenger train is a service calling at every stop on its route, just like regio. Clicking “connection details” will present you all of the information you need. This will be useful when buying the ticket, checking delays and getting around on the station. We will come back to this view later. The next website we’re going to visit is intercity.pl. This is a website of a national operator of long-distance services. I really recommend reading the “for passengers” section as it features important information about your trip. In this video I will cover one section called “our trains”. So, the carrier runs 4 categories of services. In general, express intercity premium, EIP, as the name suggests, should be the fastest and most comfortable, but also the most expensive. A complete opposite is TLK with low prices and old stock. In reality, prices are calculated by demand, with more tickets sold, the pricier they get. That’s why Intercity or IC and TLK are usually priced the same and the only difference is that some services are more popular and more expensive. Express Intercity or EIC usually are faster and more expensive than Intercity. Also pricing doesn’t always make sense, sometimes 1st class will be cheaper than 2nd, so check whether it’s the case with your connection. The journey planner is even simpler than the previous one. It can be used for international travel, but it only displays services run by PKP Intercity, so only these 4 categories I talked about earlier. After filling out the form take a look at the search results. Pictograms displayed after choosing a connection will tell you something about the train’s standard. PKP Intercity is the only carrier in Poland which allows to reserve your seat on every train. During COVID pandemic, seat reservation is compulsory and passengers without them will be fined. Intercity allows you to choose your seat from a schematic on some services, but it’s not always available. In this kind of situation I will show you a trick later into the video which will help you find your preferred seat and coach number. Next up is koleo.pl. A journey planner which function-wise is a simplified version of Portal Pasażera. It might not be really useful for just searching connections, but we will need it later to buy our train tickets. Take a look at the supported carriers list. You will be able to buy tickets for these companies’ services. Don’t worry other trains will pop up in the search results, but with wrong or no prices. As you can see you cannot buy PKP Intercity tickets, but other connections work just fine. I already mentioned a trick which allows you to see what coach and seat number you want to reserve. This is exactly what this site is about. . Let’s start from the homepage of vagonweb.cz. What we want to see is train formations. Select the country and service you want to see. Let’s say I want to check the train composition of IC Piast, so I input the name and click search. There are two entries, the only difference between them is the direction. Try out the features yourself, take a look on the seat map, pictures of the coach and pictograms underneath the car’s name. Note, that coaches stay the same most of the time but they can be in different order. That’s all what I had to show you for searching connections, now let’s buy the tickets. The last moment you can buy the ticket is on a train itself. You will need to find a train conductor, tell him where you’re going and he’ll sell you one. I think this is the worst method of purchasing a ticket as you will be charged extra for several things. Primarily, if your departure station has an open ticket office, a fee from 3 to 10 zloty depending on the carrier will be added. During pandemic PKP Intercity will not sell you a ticket onboard. In this situation the procedure is as follows, first you will need to pay for the section you travelled on, then a fee of 130 zloty will be added and then you will be kicked out on the next stop. Express Intercity Premium does that too, even not in a pandemic. To avoid these fees, visit a ticket office and buy the ticket there. They are available at every busier station. If the office is closed, you’re mostly safe, BUT that doesn’t apply to PKP Intercity which doesn’t care if it’s closed and still requires you to have a valid ticket with a seat reservation before boarding. Ticket machines are more rare and basically serve the same function as ticket offices but usually with smaller wait time. Be aware that they will sell you tickets for only local operators and the only long-distance one, so you might not be able to buy a ticket for the whole journey. I think internet does these things better, so I will now show you some websites which allow you to buy tickets online. First, we return to koleo. You have to register an account to make purchases, it’s quite a simple process. After logging-in select the connection and proceed according to on-screen instructions. Your ticket will be accessible in a form of a QR code available on the website and sent to you in an e-mail. I suggest downloading a smartphone app for easier ticket purchases on the go and easier access to your tickets. . For those of you who will be travelling with PKP Intercity, the best website to purchase your tickets from is their own. After choosing a connection, fill out the form on bottom. Be sure to choose class and set up seat reservation to your liking. As an example I would like to travel in this car in particular, I can input the seat and coach number into the form and hope for the best or just choose a non-compartment coach. There is no way to know for sure where are you going to end up, but there is one secret. At the time of preparing this video, system fills the train from its center towards edges. Knowing this you could more or less predict where your assigned seat would be. Next steps are the same as in koleo with one change, that you don’t need an account. In this case, your ticket will be emailed to you. Some carriers do not sell tickets on koleo and you need to buy them on their own website. A prime example is Koleje Śląskie. Their ticket purchasing system doesn’t differ all that much from the other, after all, it serves the same function. The last website worth checking out will be useful only for people travelling with more than one carrier. It has a special fare which reduces a cost of a ticket for connection PKP Intercity + regional. (or regional + regional) Sadly, this works for only small portion of carriers. Let me show you. This is the offer I talked about, price has been reduced by approximately 10%. Not much, but worth in my opinion. Next steps are exactly the same as before. Now that’s how you buy tickets like a local! Hopefully you learnt something new. Please consider subscribing and clicking the like button and I’ll see you on the rails.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||fire|||Hello everyone, it's me again. I've been here for a month because I'm trying to catch up at the same time. I don't want to leave you either, because Eurovisioon is where we are all connected by love. I try to be with you and react as much as I can. I hope you forgive me for what happened. Today I will react to Poland's song. Poland was in my Top 3 last year. Ochman was a very high end song. I don't know what song was chosen this year. I don't know about the act and the songs. All I know is, people have been uprising since last night. They people said: 'Don't let send the song go', 'we didn't vote for this song', 'she deliberately won the first place in the jury'. Blanka's boyfriend's mother is said to be the head of the jury and the choreographer is on the jury. There are also injustices, let's see maybe it can be canceled. If they (TVP) did this, I don't think anything would change anyway. Most likely Blanka will represent Poland the song 'Solo'. When I see the girl, I think it's a moving song. I don't want to keep you waiting too long, so let's listen to the song right away. Blanka, 'Solo' Poland 2023 with you... Her name... For a moment, I felt like a lollipop would come. What's this ? She tried to look like Ariana Grande. Her voice is so bad. Who made this girl winner? Her voice is so bad. What song is this? I have to go  wild! What's this ? To bad Did they listen to it and earn it? Did they listen to this song and earn it? Just because the girl is beautiful.. I'm telling you very clearly, he definitely won by cheating. My guess is that... Stage show, voice and song the girl has no chance to be the win with this voice. If the Polish people chose this song, do not participate. You determine by internal selection. The voice is so bad, it doesn't match the song at all. It's like trying to cover a song that has been made before. The song is already bad, what is it? I can't say anything. Even I'm going to apologize for subjecting you to this. I'm not apologizing, Poland should apologize for making you listen to this. What's this ? Is the Efendi? (Azerbaijan 2021) Same Efendi. Everything was stolen. I think the song was stolen, it's a very classic song. The choreography was collected from somewhere, the sound is bad. How did you choose this? You are Poland, you choose Ochman last year. Soo baad! The girl herself can not keep up with the song. Do i have a mistake? Music is very simple. No such thing. A little… I can't talk long about this song. I'm going to waste my time unfortunately. Ok, the girl is beautiful. The choreography is 'garbage', sorry.  She stole the choreography, and the Master did the same. Efendi the same! You're scribbling in your friend's notebook, change it a bit. I waited for 'Lollipop' or 'Barbie' throughout the song. The outfit is ok! The song and music are bad. The simplest music in the world right here. Congratulations to whoever made your arrangement, I wish you had never worked so hard, it's a waste of your time. This song is not suitable for that voice. It does not examine the voice, it cannot rise. I don't get it, he doesn't use his voice. How can you achieve success in the song? I wish you hadn't participed If you were second, you would say, "Yes, I was second" and continue on your way, you are spoken in the country right now. I give so much credit to the Polish people.  Why did you make her win? She got the victory with cheating I'm sure I'm not saying anything, I can't waste any more of my time on this song. The sound, the choreography, the song are bad. That's all I have to say. This is how Poland… I've never been happy. I vomited a little hate, I'm happy. I'm sorry, nobody, don't tell me 'the song is very good' with this song. She's already eliminated from the voice. What are you thinking? Do you think this girl cheated? Please leave your comments with us under the comment section Follow us on Instagram, Twitter and follow our website for the most recent news. I love you. Don't forget to donate from the links below! I’m going for now, see you later! Bye!
 |||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||With economic stature in tatters after 
World War II, Poland was on the brink   of crashing. Now, almost a century later, 
it's primed to become the "Next Germany". Previously, a free-market economy with 
agricultural richness, was doomed to   economic despair after the initiation of 
communist rule in the 1940s. Fast forward   to the 21st century, and we're witnessing 
an economic boost that is off the charts.  What transpired this miraculous change?
The war is not only chaotic on the battlefield   when lives are lost, but the chaos seeps through 
the bloodbath and toward the times of peace. For   Poland, it was the beginning of another war, 
the economic salvation. The war had exacted   a heavy toll on the nation, leading to immense 
loss of life, widespread destruction, and the   displacement of millions. The Yalta Conference 
of 1945, which divided Europe into spheres of   influence, placed Poland in the Soviet orbit.
With Poland in tatters, it found itself under the   communist rule. Once, the land of fields filled 
with agricultural richness was left with gray,   decaying buildings, and a sense of economic 
despair characterized the landscape. The   communist regime introduced a planned economy, 
which stifled innovation and left the nation with   low expectations and a challenging way of life.
It continued for another decade, and in came   the 1970s. In an otherwise disco era, the 
Polish economy further deteriorated to an   unimaginable level. Growth was hampered 
by outdated industrial infrastructure,   government subsidies that concealed inefficiencies 
in production, and artificially high wages that   needed to align with productivity. By the late 
1980s, these issues had precipitated an economic   crisis characterized by a ballooning government 
deficit and hyperinflation. At this time,   you might wonder, "How did Poland gather itself"?
In sports, we talk about comebacks and   change-defining moments. Like Michael Jordan's 
famous slam dunk in 1987, Poland was desperate   for a miracle. And post-communist era 
is when the recovery began. But let's   stay within a reasonable distance.
In the immediate post-communist era,   Poland found itself at a crossroads. The planned 
economy, a hallmark of the communist regime,   had left the nation with an antiquated industrial 
infrastructure, inefficiency masked by government   subsidies, and high wages relative to 
productivity. These lingering issues had   created economic stagnation and instability. 
The need for change was clear, but the path   forward needed to be clarified. And just like 
a patient who's in v-fib, it needed a shock   treatment or, in other words, a "shock therapy."
The founder of shock therapy, Leszek Balcerowicz's   vision was revolutionary. He recognized that 
Poland's transition to a market-oriented   economy required a bold and unconventional 
approach. Its objectives were twofold, i.e.,   to control rampant hyperinflation and expedite 
Poland's shift towards a market economy.   Balcerowicz's plan was akin to a defibrillator 
for Poland's ailing economy – a shock to the   system to jumpstart the transformation.
The key components of this plan comprised   heavy decisions. We mentioned that Poland is in a 
war after the world war. Due to this plan, Poland   lost the battle but was able to win the war, 
as we will see in the latter half of the video.  Wage Freeze: The plan included the freezing of 
wages, a necessary measure to curb hyperinflation   and realign salaries with economic reality. This 
decision was a tough pill for many, but it was a   fundamental step in stabilizing the economy.
Price Deregulation: Another vital aspect of   the plan was the removal of price controls. 
This move allowed market forces to determine   prices, fostering competition and 
efficiency in various industries.  Subsidy Phase-Out: State-owned enterprises 
had long relied on government subsidies to   stay afloat, often perpetuating inefficiency. 
The Balcerowicz Plan gradually phased out   these subsidies, compelling these entities to 
operate more independently and competitively.  Promotion of Private Enterprise: The plan paved 
the way for large-scale private enterprise,   promoting the growth of a private sector that 
would drive economic innovation and development.  The Balcerowicz Plan marked the beginning of 
a transformative journey for Poland. It was a   testament to the country's ability to embrace 
change and adapt to new economic realities. In   1999, when Poland joined NATO, on March 
12, 1999. The Polish government claims   that since accession to NATO, the Polish 
armed forces have become "a catalyst of   change." Something to ponder, isn't it?
Resilience and Growth has Been the   Hallmark of Poland's Quest for Economic Supremacy
Poland's history is uniquely marred by bloodshed,   making the nation exceptionally sensitive 
to external threats. Recent provocative   statements by Dmitry Medvedev, the deputy 
chairman of Russia's Security Council,   have only heightened this sensitivity. Not to 
mention that the war on Ukraine also added an   unwanted struggle for the Polish government to 
take their economic development to the next level.  However, it turned out that, like in any 
other sporting arena, the game is never   won when the odds are with you. The fun is 
when you beat those odds and come out on top!  These geopolitical circumstances didn't hinder 
Poland's struggle to be at the top among its   neighbors. But the level of composure shown by 
Poland during almost a century of unrest made this   country a giant in the European Union. A stray 
missile landed in a Polish border town last week,   killing two people. Some European leaders 
worried as much about how Poland's right-wing   government would react as they did about the 
possibility that Russia had ordered the strike.  Poland's longstanding distrust of all things 
Russian and the current government's deep   antipathy toward Moscow triggered concern 
from Brussels to Berlin that Warsaw might   do something rash. Instead of losing 
its nerve, however, Warsaw was stoical,   placing its armed forces on alert while keeping 
its powder dry until there was clarity about   what happened. (The conclusion is that it was an 
air defense missile fired by Ukraine to protect   itself from a Russian attack that went astray.)
That's just one thing that they have done since   Russia attacked Ukraine. Poland has 
been a constant supporter of Ukraine,   which has further increased its visibility on the 
global scale. They have consistently shown that   you can't win battles by aligning yourself with 
powerhouses like Russia or the U.S. You need to   be strong and independent without any assistance 
to make an impact. To some extent, it's poetic   how Poland has made of itself among powerhouses.
Unfortunately, that's not where the story ends.  Amidst such challenging geopolitical 
circumstances, Poland has undertaken a massive   rearmament program, underscoring its determination 
to safeguard its sovereignty and strategic   interests. Notably, Poland recently finalized a 
£1.9 billion deal for British CAMMs air defense   missiles, adding to its growing arsenal. With a 
defense budget of $30 billion, constituting 4.25%   of its GDP – the highest proportion within NATO – 
Poland's rearmament is nothing short of a fervent   spending spree that will substantially 
reshape the balance of power in Europe.  When discussing balance of power, it can get 
cloudy, especially in Europe. Each country   belonging to extended Europe is excelling in one 
way or another. Russia is already a superpower,   Sweden is already a technological hub, and 
we all know what the U.K. is capable of.   But hardly anybody didn't write off Poland. 
In 1989, Polish workers had a GDP per capita   of just a tenth of their German counterparts.
Three decades of steady growth has wrought a   miracle. The economic disparities have narrowed 
dramatically. Adjusted for purchasing parity,   GDP per head in Poland is now £28,200 
compared with £35,000 in the U.K.,   £34,200 in France and £39,800 in Germany. At its 
current trajectory rate, Poland will overtake the   U.K. by 2030. Since the millennium, Poland's real 
GDP per capita has more than doubled; by contrast,   GDP per capita in Britain, France, and Germany 
grew between 15pc and 24pc over the same period.  Further, Poland's rearmament efforts encompass 
a range of acquisitions that underscore the   nation's commitment to defense. From procuring 
250 American M1A2 Abrams tanks to 500 HIMARS   systems and 96 Apache attack helicopters, 
Poland is on track to possess Europe's most   formidable land army by the end of the decade. 
This transformation is significant, harkening back   to Poland's historical role as a great power.
The strategic rationale behind this surge in   military acquisitions is multifaceted. Russia's 
performance in the ongoing Ukraine conflict,   while not overwhelmingly successful, has 
demonstrated its capacity to prolong the   war for an extended period. This prolonged 
conflict would inevitably lead to significant   logistical challenges for the West, depleting 
the available material for Ukraine. In response,   Poland's military leadership remains resolute, 
leaving no room for complacency. General Rajmund   Andrzejczak, the Chief of the Polish General 
Staff, emphasized the urgency of their efforts,   noting that they have the financial 
means to secure essential weaponry. The answer to the question is that they're already 
doing it. Even though they are facing inflation   like any other country, post-pandemic, the cost 
of living is cheaper than that of Paris, London,   and Berlin. Imagine having an inflation 
rate of 15% (double the average of E.U.),   but the people are happier there. For 
instance, rental prices in Wrocław are   approximately one-fifth of those in 
London, and a pint of beer at a local   bar won't set you back much more than £1.
Perhaps economists or historians of the   far future won't look at the figures at a 
cellular level, but on a larger scale – they   are thriving. Polish had to work an average of 
1830 hours a year, more than Americans, British,   French, and even Germans. Finally, their hard 
work is reaping awards. Yes, its counterparts   still consider Poland a poor country, but 
at this rate, they will be at the top.  Another point to ponder is its military strength 
has gone from strength to strength, evolving   from its post-communist roots into a formidable 
force that commands respect not only domestically   but on the international stage as well.
Today, Poland's military boasts a strength   of approximately 150,000 personnel, with 
a notable addition of 30,000 troops in a   territorial defense force established 
in 2017. These territorial troops,   often dubbed "weekend soldiers," complete 16 
days of training, followed by refresher courses,   a concept initially met with skepticism. However, 
Ukraine's successful use of mobile militias armed   with anti-tank and anti-aircraft missiles has 
turned this idea into a sensible strategy.   And they're not even confined to holding on to 
investments to bolster their defense. Notable   deals include a £4.9 billion agreement with the 
U.S. for 250 Abrams tanks and the acquisition   of U.S. F-16s. In 2020, Poland signed a $4.6 
billion deal for 32 F-35 fighters, marking a   significant stride in its air force capabilities.
A substantial portion of its recent military   expenditures has been directed towards 
Korea, with agreements spanning tanks,   aircraft, and other arms. Notably, Poland has 
ordered approximately $10 billion to $12 billion   worth of weaponry from Korea, and the future 
promises a continuous supply of military hardware. There are no upsets in real life, only 
perseverance and determination. Poland's   political and economic struggles seem 
like they happened centuries ago. Alas,   this is the making of a true nation. Did the 
hard yards, at times, find themselves on the   wrong end of negative remarks but persevered 
– showcasing how much it evolved since the   turbulent post-world-war era. However, "Goal 2030" 
is still a long way to go. Yes, Poland is on the   right track, but only time will tell whether 
they can be a powerhouse or stay a dark horse.|||In this video, I will review some of 
the essential updates on PeerBerry,   which may affect your investing 
experience in the future. This is not a review of PeerBerry, if you want 
to learn more about how the platform works,   you can watch a video I made two years ago 
or read our PeerBerry review on P2P Empire. While the loan originators 
change on PeerBerry frequently,   the functionality remains more or less the same. Today, I will be covering the end 
of Polish loans on PeerBerry, new   investment opportunities as well as the decrease 
in interest rates for the Aventus group loans. As you might know already,   PeerBerry is in the process of delisting 
all Polish loans by the end of the year. All your current investments 
in Poland will be repurchased,   and your money will be returned 
to you with the accrued interest. We are working with our Polish lenders for more 
than six years already. All the time in Poland,   there are some changes, regulations and 
interest caps, etc. It’s not a surprise   to us at all. But from now, the 1st of 
January next year, there are, I would say,   some big changes and our partners cannot 
fund the lending business in Poland anymore. We have been preparing for this for 
quite some time and we are working   with our Polish companies. We are decreasing 
the investments in Polish lenders for three to   four months and our investors can probably 
see it. And from the end of this year,   we will not offer investments into Polish 
companies. So this is the biggest change. If you want to watch the full 
interview with the CEO at PeerBerry,   it’s available for members 
on buymeacoffee.com/p2pempire So basically, the new regulation 
in Poland doesn’t allow lenders   to fund their loan books with P2P investors. PeerBerry has been aware 
of this change for several   months and has explored all the legal options. The lenders in Poland will continue 
to fund their lending portfolios from   their own capital to fully comply 
with the new regulations in Poland. Some other market players have a 
different interpretation of the law. For example, Lonvest informed me that 
their lender works with a card product   and has a small payment institution license 
for which the new restrictions don’t apply. The CEO at PeerBerry told me that 
the regulator might amend the   law to include some workarounds, 
such as issuing loans via cards,   which makes funding from investors in 
Poland not a sustainable strategy anymore. According to the legal opinion from the Aventus 
team, any funding via investors is prohibited.   The non-compliance puts the lender at risk 
of losing the relevant license in Poland. The result of the delisting of 
Polish loans on PeerBerry is   a decrease of 17 million euro 
under PeerBerry’s management. The Polish portfolio represents 
about 17% of the assets,   meaning there will be even more 
cash drag in the short term. As Aventus Group has been preparing 
for this event for quite some time,   the group will introduce a new business loan to 
replace some of the loan volumes from Poland. The new business loan will likely have a loan term 
between 3 and 6 months and an interest rate of 9%. The investments in those loans 
should be repaid on time as they   will be cleared automatically 
at the end of the loan term. The funds will finance the portfolios 
of newly launched companies in emerging   markets such as Mexico, Colombia, 
South Africa, Nigeria, and Tanzania. As soon as the lending portfolios 
in those markets are large enough,   they will also be listed as 
individual lenders on PeerBerry. Outside of those new companies, Aventus 
is also launching new brands in the   Philippines and Romania, which will 
be listed on PeerBerry next year. The lending volumes from Poland 
should be replaced with new   investment opportunities sometime 
during the first quarter of 2024. It’s not the first time that lenders on 
PeerBerry will be delisted. The Aventus   Group left Vietnam earlier this year 
due to extreme regulatory challenges. Last year, PeerBerry lost the lending 
portfolios from Russia and Ukraine as   the war broke out, which created a much 
bigger hole of about 50 million euro. The Polish portfolio will not be lost, 
the lenders will continue operating,   and they will remain part of 
the group guarantee, which,   as many of you know, is a very reliable 
security system for PeerBerry investors. Currently, Aventus Group’s portfolio 
amounts to 217 million euros. The   portfolio of Polish lenders 
makes up 46,73 million euro,   and the forecasted profit of Polish lenders 
for 2023 is 22 million euro before taxes. So having the lenders from 
Poland in the group guarantee,   despite not offering any loans on PeerBerry, 
is a benefit for investors as those lenders   will provide the backing of all the 
new lenders in emerging markets. Aventus Group is the only financial group that   repaid almost all war-affected loans to 
its investors via its group guarantee. This, of course, created more 
trust and confidence in the   lender’s ability to protect investors' 
funds even during black swan events. Most other platforms came up with excuses 
as to why they won’t repay the money. Due to Aventus honoring the group guarantee,   PeerBerry’s lending volumes 
reached pre-war levels. Even though Aventus is expanding quickly, it 
still cannot meet investors’ investment demand. There are specific key metrics that lenders follow 
to be able to fund loans from investors. This is   connected to the portfolio's performance, 
scorecards in new markets, and leverage. On some other platforms, you might 
find lenders with dubious management   and questionable payment morale; 
this isn’t the case on PeerBerry. PeerBerry users and the Aventus group 
are aware of that, so the group will   decrease the interest rate again, 
which might upset some investors. From a business perspective, it makes total 
sense. If the demand from investors is high,   lenders lower the interest rate 
to decrease the funding costs. Additionally, the risk for investors is being   lowered with the strongest buyback 
and group guarantee in the industry. So, you should expect a lower loan supply   and a lower interest rate on 
PeerBerry in the near future. Now, you might be wondering what to do. Should 
you stay on PeerBerry or look elsewhere? The Polish lenders have been some   of the financially strongest 
companies operating in Europe. Exposing your funds to various market 
risks in emerging countries might not   be something investors will be happy about. I will not be telling you what to do. This channel 
is not about giving investment advice; it’s about   presenting you with investment opportunities 
as well as the risks that you must consider. Everyone will have a different risk profile and 
experience with P2P lending. What I can tell   you is my opinion and the actions I will take 
regarding the upcoming changes on PeerBerry. As many of you know, almost my entire portfolio   on PeerBerry has been exposed to 
Poland for most of the past year. This portfolio will be redistributed to 
loans from Romania, the Czech Republic,   and Spain and potentially also into 
the newly offered business loans. PeerBerry has been able to 
navigate through challenging   events successfully in the past few years. The management team protected investors' 
funds even during the pandemic outbreak   or the war in Ukraine, which impacted 
almost everyone who invested on PeerBerry. I expect that PeerBerry will continue to honor   its promises to investors and 
uphold all offered guarantees. At the same time, I am not putting 
all my eggs in the same basket. If you follow my portfolio updates, you 
know that I am also invested in Esketit,   Crowdpear, Fintown, and Robocash. All those platforms work as expected and continue 
fulfilling their obligations toward investors. I know that risks can materialize anywhere and   that the loan availability 
might sometimes be limited. Still, I prefer to be exposed to platforms with   insights into risk management 
and portfolio performance. Investing in a few good platforms is 
a better strategy than spreading funds   across all the available P2P lending sites, 
which will almost certainly cause some losses,   not to mention the time one needs 
to spend researching and monitoring. If you are planning to also invest on other 
platforms, consider using our affiliate links   on P2P Empire. Often you will be able to 
get additional cashback bonuses and at   the same time you help to fund this channel 
where you can find a ton of value for free. Finding the best risk and return ratio 
in the P2P lending industry is not easy,   but following P2P Empire is, so 
if you like the quick update,   hit the like button and subscribe 
to not miss out on future videos. Let me know what you will do about your 
portfolio on PeerBerry in the comments below. Thanks for watching, and I 
will catch you in the next one.|||I don't know this is my girlfriend he goes hi hi welcome back to our another coffee date and today we are going to talk about di about our own experience okay let's get started dating what what's the definition of dating or relationship oh in my culture in Japan we usually say like uh after three days we can we have confession so after 3 days you or the other person will confess like would you be my girlfriend boyfriend whatever and that's how it works in Japan and in Poland from what I know sometimes you just find out after some time that you're dating my friends told me so in general do you have confession culture no I don't think so maybe it's it depends on people but mostly from what I know the people will be like oh you're dating and you never know when you started dating and how do you know your exclusive I don't know because it never happens to me because I think it's better just to say oh we dating now maybe when you meet your friends oh this is my girlfriend this is my boyriend yeah because yeah yeah yeah yeah I think so but dating means would you also date another person at the same time or only one exclusive only one like I know that people might think like other at the same time wow it's for me it's like confusing yeah for me because I would rather know if I'm in a relationship with someone or not I haven't got any relationship experience with Polish guys I went one only one day with a Polish guy and how was that he goes [Music] to for me like last date with a Polish guy it was like 5 years ago it was quite a long time ago mhm you don't have cander no we got pizza it's so much cander yeah so uh as I said in Japan we have like first three days before getting in relationship and usually I guess we wouldn't even kiss before in relationship that's I'm not sure about like adult because I was in Japan until like Bachelor so still students period in my life mhm not like uh fully adult food not in your 20s yeah yeah we maybe we hold hands but maybe not so because as I said in the last video we don't hug each other when like between friends even right this is huge move you know after confession you you could like have physical uh Al confession yeah physical move that's that's what I saw in like in dramas TV dramas mangas I know after confession you would kiss but it might take long time that's why it's like three days only three days oh so it's only always 3 days not always but after 3 days you you have to know if you like someone or not it's like so quickly how can you say but not of experience oh okay okay mine was not like after 3 days I think it might take longer than 3 days for me to say if I like something or not to be in yeah yeah because after 3 days you don't really know the person so they might pretend to be someone else at the beginning I think in Poland people kiss before dating mhm so it's not like something not something crazy yeah it's not something surprising like if someone faes you all we kiss on first dat for example how about like how you go public so for example in Japan couples wouldn't this on Street public affections affe I think people don't care here because often often you can see like people sitting on benches in planton kissing for example or anywhere in a tra stop people don't care hugging yeah hugging is I think the most basic thing to see on the streets so it's different I don't see such a thing in hand people wouldn't do it maybe just holding hands that's all maybe maybe even high but here you're also you might also feel uncomfortable when you're seeing like someone kissing on the street I don't feel comfortable often when someone's like next to me it's like depends on the level like if they are King like lightly it's but then they if they start making out like no yeah it will be un comfortable for me because I saw uh some people implanting a girl sitting on like a lap on the lap mhm I don't know how to describe this but I think like much nothing public place it's too much like seeing people making out yeah it's different from what I saw in Japan mhm how would you like to text with you person I think like a couple time maybe not a couple times a day but not too much but not like at all mhm I like like to text you when I have time but I often like I'm at work or meeting friends so for me it might take some time to reply mhm often however like text you once a day like how are you and that's it I think for me it's like no I would like to know more about like how how was his day or something like that what he's up to not too less not too much yeah the same for me for example I don't want to call every day cuz some people want to call video a but for me that's too much yeah for me so it depends where you live yeah because if you live in the same city for me it's better just to go and meet them mhm then just like video calling for me it's like want this mhm but if the person lives out of City then like sometimes con will be fine but yeah like for my friends sometimes people when they start dating they're seeing each other every single day not every day yeah so and maybe yeah in the earlier phase of the relationship not every day maybe three times a week mhm to is okay as well I want to spend that week yeah I think once or twice a week is okay after how many months would you like to live together you should set a [Music] deadline|||Hello, everyone! I just got my card.   I thank for the support, ant it was awesome. So, 
thank you very much. I recommend everybody to   get in touch, so that will be easy 
process to get the card. Thank you.|||The war in Ukraine continues. Russians 
are murdering civilians, raping women,   killing children, destroying entire towns 
and villages. After losing the war, Russia   will have to pay war reparations to Ukraine. 
This should be obvious to anyone who respects   international law and believes in justice.
Russia owes Ukraine war reparations, which   it will have to pay. There is no justice without 
reparations. Therefore, Poland shall not cease its   efforts aimed at holding Russia accountable 
for its violations of international law,   both at the state and individual level, this is 
what Andrzej Duda, the President of Poland said   at the 77th session of the UN General Assembly
The international community must recognize this,   otherwise the victims of Russian aggression 
will be plunged into poverty for decades.  Europe has not witnessed such 
crimes since World War II,   when Soviet Russia and Nazi Germany unleashed 
the greatest military conflict in history,   setting Europe and the World on fire. The Germans 
in Poland, like the Russians in Ukraine today,   murdered civilians, raped women, kidnapped 
children and looted Polish property.   The Germans laid to waste the 
entire Polish towns and villages.  Today, perhaps not many Germans want to recognize 
the fact that during World War II their ancestors   murdered over 5 million Polish citizens, 21% 
of whom were children under the age of 10.  The Germans almost completely razed the Polish 
capital Warsaw and many other cities and villages.  Poland lost almost 78 thousand square kilometers 
of its territory as a result of the war.   The Soviet Union took Poland's eastern territories 
and in return gave land taken from Germany. Poland   had no say in the matter. At the time Poland 
was in the Soviet Union's sphere of influence.   Germany has never really accounted for its 
crimes against Poland and never handed over   its territories to Poland as reparations, 
as some are now trying to characterize.  As a result of World War II over 
a period of 7 year 11 million 200   thousand Polish citizens perished .
In the Third Reich, Polish citizens   were forced into slave labor. The Germans 
deported 2 million 100 thousand people   who worked a total of almost 5 million working 
years as slaves in German companies and farms.  The Germans kidnapped 196 thousand Polish 
children. Only 30 thousand returned home.  As a result of the pseudo-medical 
experiments that took place in prisons   and German concentration camps, 590 thousand 
Polish citizens suffered severe, permanent   damage to their physical and mental health.
Before and during World War II, the Germans,   in planned actions murdered more than 
100 thousand representatives of the   Polish elite and intelligentsia: professors, 
doctors, officers as well as politicians.  Over $196 billion is the amount of material 
damage the Germans inflicted on Poland   during World War II, in the destruction of the 
civilian fabric of entire towns and villages,   Polish forests and farmland, road and railroad 
infrastructure, power plants and factories.  The Germans destroyed and looted cultural 
goods and works of art worth over $4,5 billion. Polish citizens lived in poverty 
for many years after World War II.   Poland did not have a chance to pick itself 
up because The next occupiers – the Soviet Union continued to rob Poland and its citizens.
So far Germany has not paid war reparations to Poland for all these atrocities and war losses. 
What’s more, according to them the case is closed.  German Chancellor Olaf Scholz, in an 
interview with Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung,   when asked about war reparations to Poland, 
replied briefly, "Like all previous federal   governments, I can point out that this issue is 
conclusively settled under international law."  German President Frank -Walter Steinmeier 
also said :“the German federal government   has unequivocally replied that the issue of 
reparations is by no means open at the moment.”   President added that he would 
"reiterate the position of the federal government"  on the reparations issue.
Now Poland is claiming reparations. It estimates   its war losses at $1 trillion 532 billion 170 
million. Anyone interested can read the detailed   calculations at www.straty-wojenne.pl, where 
the report is available in English language.  "Perhaps it seems to some that the topic of 
reparations has been closed, so I politely   inform them that this is not the case." - 
said Polish President Andrzej Duda in New York  Polish Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki 
wrote in an article published in the German   newspaper „Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung” 
that "The scale of the destruction wrought   by the Germans in Poland during World 
War II is underestimated. Poland never   received adequate compensation for this.
Germany claims that Poland has repudiated   reparations and has no legal basis for demanding 
them. Poland, however, claims that the matter has   not been settled by any agreement between Poland 
and Germany and demands reparations. In fact - why   should Poland, a country ravaged by Germany during 
World War II, voluntarily relinquish reparations?   This is absurd. Therefore a legal 
dispute began. In this dispute,   one thing is certain - during World War II, 
Germany caused enormous harm to Poland and caused   losses for which it has not paid to this day.
Germany paid war reparations to many other countries.  The destruction and crimes 
committed in Poland were incomparably greater. Is this what prompts the Germans 
to look for legal loopholes to avoid paying   reparations to Poland? Is this how a democratic 
state that respects the rule of law should act?  Today Germany is creating itself as a moral 
superpower, and if it wants to be one,   it should find a suitable legal form as soon as 
possible and compensate Poland for its war losses.   If Germany does not want to call it reparations, 
then nothing prevents it from calling it something else. However a step should be taken to 
come to an agreement with Poland and Poles,   to make up for the wrongs and 
pay the bill for World War II.|||I relocated just over a year ago  More than a year ago Two years in Poznan Quite soon it will have been one year. And I’m super satisfied with my decision to relocate  Moving, is a serious step. Еven more so, if you’re moving for permanent residence. I have a family with two kids and I felt really scared. It’s never an easy experience for anybody, I’d say  No, you don’t have to be scared, but rather perk yourself up and believe that everything is going to turn out fine. If something doesn’t click, it’s not the end of the world I’m not going to die, I’ll just go back to where I came from. We are massively supported by the company. Our company makes visas for workers and for their families  It offered us a flat. You have to get the legal residence paperwork sorted. The company also helps with that. Well, the company  covered all the major expenses. I don’t really know what else to add. Yes! I got right company in right moment It’s very similar to Belarus.  Similar food, similar clothes, similar behavior Besides, the language is similar to ours It’s easy to understand Polish because the language is, basically, very much like Russian or Belarusian I feel safer in Poland  And people are very friendly The people in the streets are always smiling. When go for walks with kids, they often get a lot of compliments. The way I see it, relocation fully enabled us to take advantage of everything that modern life has to offer. I came here on a Sunday. It is common knowledge that almost everything is closed on Sundays in Poland. Everything is quire unfamiliar here. Your parents aren’t  here to help out with the kids. In my opinion, finding a place to live is the greatest challenge. Any relocation is about new opportunities. Some experiences are inevitably sad and some are superb, but it is all worth it. When I came it was a hard time.  But now I feel like I’m already feel comfortable The people are in no rush, they take things easy. Compared to Warsaw, I can’t help feeling an amazing serenity here. There is a lot of greenery in the city, lots of parks  Really beautiful ancient architecture  You can have everything that you want,  so if you want shopping mall, you have it  if you want swimming pool, you have it   I like these bike roads   This city gives me opportunities to ride a lot There are lots of travelling opportunities. 5 hours to the sea, 5 hours to the mountains. Great airport I’ve already taken more flights this year than I have in my entire lifetime! I really like the office. It’s like in the city center  It’s close to everything We have a beautiful office. It’s a place you want to be in. It makes your working days more bright Best coworkers and best office in Poznan  This is why I like SOFTSWISS|||things you might not know about Poland Poland is a European country and is the ninth largest in Europe U.S citizens can enter Poland without a Visa it also has the biggest castle in the world and a Bear Once served in its Army|||Let me show you around my last trip in Poland.  We started visiting Goniadz, 
a small town born around the   railway sector and crossed by the Biebrza river.  It has a lovely park with an gazebo equipped 
for huge barbecues and a very pintoresque and   funny-shapped sauna.
Goniadz   is surrounded by nature, amongst which vast 
and green wet meadows are definitely the kings,   extending as far as the eye can see. We then went to Monki, where almost every 
house had charming gardens full of either   flowers or fruits and vegetables.
Most of those houses had a very   characteristic cubic shape.
In some neighbourhoods, the buildings   were painted in an unique way, with the name of 
the street and their numbers in a huge format.  The public schools were unbelievably 
well equipped, with running tracks,   beach-volley courts and much more.
Another captivating thing was the   edge of the city, which was limited by the 
start of a leafy forest with gigantic trees. On our second day there, we went to a wedding,   where we enjoyed local food of great quality 
and I could discover some polish traditions The third day started rainy but, 
fortunately, the sky cleared up quickly,   so we could do as planned and spend an outdoorsy 
day amongst Podlasie, AKA the lungs of Poland.  We visited the Biebrza National Park,   which has wooden paths that connect 
the many viewpoints contained in it.  From one of those, it's possible to go 
off-track and cross a few fences to get   a glimpse of what Poland went trough during 
the last century, a history kept and told by   the Osowiec Fortress, which witnessed 
many battles during both World Wars,   including the famous "Attack of the Dead Men".
The landscape was breathtaking and totally   overtaken by nature by now, but knowing 
that all those holes and hills were once   created by bombs and grenades inevitably 
brought some bitter thoughts to our minds Our next stop was Tykocin. This town has 
a castle where battle recreations happen   yearly to commemorate how it was retaken back 
on the 17th century after a Swedish invasion.  The city also has an impressive 
re-constructed synagogue hidden   inside a simple building. Its walls 
are covered in Hebrew inscriptions   and it hosts an exposition about 
the Jewish culture and religion.  For lunch we went to a dwór, which 
are restaurants in the middle of the   forest that used to be manor houses of 
Polish nobles. They are usually wooden,   serve traditional food and 
use folkloric decoration. We spent our fourth day in Bialystok. 
There, we visited the Branicki Palace,   which faces an astonishing French-style garden 
and is surrounded by a huge park filled with   big trees and wildlife. This palace is the reason 
why Bialystok is known as "the Polish Versailles".  Our next stop was one of the most 
eye-catching churches of the city.   The Saint Roch's church is also a symbol of the 
Polish independence after the first world war,   since building a church there was denied several 
times by the previous tsarist authorities,   but it was finally done once 
Poland became independent again.  Another known landmark of the city 
is the "Constitution of May 3" park,   which has very funny-looking chickens, bears, 
wolves, bisons and many more animals. It also   contains a military cemetery and is 
maintained keeping human intervention   to a minimum. Signs with information about how 
and why that is done are spread around the park.|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||as early as 2012 before the 2014 war in dunbas between russian-backed separatists and ukraine forces the paul's military began to concentrate on the mobilization of all its military forces in particular the polish army reliance on soviet era heavy weapons systems such as its howitzers infantry vehicles hundreds of t-72 and t-91 main battle tanks and bm-21 grad launchers as an interim measure poland upgrade a number of its t-72 and t-91 main battle tanks and start its own development of new weapons systems replacing with its soviet-made artillery systems we've just seen the successful introduction of the crab 155 millimeter howitzer the polish army has also purchased ready-made systems such as the american high miles m142 a multiple launch rocket system in 2015 following the war in donbass paul announced the modernization of a number of its previously used german level 2 tanks first transferred to polish forces in 2002 the modernization has been very slow with just over 140 of the 250 tanks have so far modernized the leopard tpl on the newer tpl m1 standard in february 2022 the post ministry of defense signed a much publicized deal with about 4.75 billion dollars to buy 250 m1a2 abrams sep b3 tanks from the united states in april 2022 u.s soldiers seen here of the 2nd battalion 34th armored regiment first armored brigade combat team first infantry division hosted the first aid runs operations summit with soldiers from across the polish land forces this first ever three-day training event sees the us army bringing along its abrams tanks m88a2 hercules recovery vehicle and the all-new heavy assault bridge the gab which will allow participating polish soldiers to learn abram's capabilities tactics sustainment operations and master gunner operations as well as conducting joint exercises such as combined arms breach seen here and joint tank assault operations with inventory fighting vehicles and humvee the first infantry division is among other units assigned to vehicle america's forward deployed corps in europe that works alongside nato allies and regional security partners to provide combat credible forces execute joint bilateral and multinational training exercise and provide command and control to rotational and assigned units in the european theater in summer 2022 polish crews will receive 28 m1a2 sep v2 which are released for training purposes along with m8882 hercules recovery vehicles they will begin formal training to become certified on the incoming tanks enhancing interoperability with u.s forces while this training takes place some polish soldiers will continue to embed with u.s army units for the abrams apprentice programme where they will continue to learn master gunner and maintenance operations you should expect that the polish army will receive its first m1a to abram set the three tanks in late 2024 however with the recent russian illegal and unjustified war in ukraine polish government officials have asked for timelines for delivery to be urgent revised and brought forward the polish forces were receiving one of the best tanks in the world and most modern the 68.8 on the set v3 tank has amongst many improvements increased protection using depleted uranium inserts in hull and turret with more passive ballistic protection added to the turret faces along with new explosive reactive armor mountings and trophy active protection systems added to the turret sides you|||Hey travel buddies, we are Kat & Cezary, and we are one of the Kiwi.com World Travel Hackers  traveling on a budget. We started traveling by hacking the cheapest flight from Warsaw to Baltic countries. We were searching from Poland to either Lithuania, Latvia, or even Estonia. So basically, anywhere in the Baltic countries. Since Kiwi.com offers you the cheapest flights, we have found one to Kaunas, Lithuania, just for €15.5 per person. After paying online with our Visa card,  we had everything booked and we started our one-month journey by visiting Kaunas. Kaunas has a very beautiful fortress, amazing cultural events along promenade street called Laisves,  on which you can find a unique architecture. Of course, we visited the capital city — Vilnius.  Vilnius is one of the oldest capital cities in Northern Europe and has over 50 churches.  As the travel hackers, we know where to find the best deals. In the morning, we had a coffee with the traditional candy called "Surelis" with yellow cheese from Lithuania — everything for €1.39. We tasted Lithuania by drinking Gira, eating dry meat, and a lot of chocolate. And also, did you know that one part of the capital Vilnius declared a Republic? That's right! Užupis. The part of the town behind the river has own institution written in 18 languages as a memorial, and you can also get a stamp to your passport. Lithuania is a small cute country, and with Kiwi.com we had to explore one more attraction — t's called The Hill of Crosses on the northwest of Lithuania nearby the city Šiauliai. It's a beautiful place with a breathtaking atmosphere. The second country we chose is Latvia. Again, with Kiwi.com app,  we chose a random flight from Baltic countries back to Poland — and the cheapest one was from Riga.  Riga is capital of Latvia. Two days are not enough to explore this European hidden gem. Latvia is known for having the world's tallest woman, one of the oldest flags, and Daina folk music. As a big travel hack, we encourage you to get to know some local people, hang out with them, and feel the local energy. In Riga, we tasted most amazing drinks and food, and we paid with our Visa cards.  My favorite in the city was a building with two black cats on the roof — one of the iconic symbols of Riga. And, from now on, we will be traveling to Asia. Cannot say much, but our next video will be about three layovers. Stay tuned.|||This is going to be the worst vlog of your
life.
I know. I love this... Bread, this thing and this other thing, cucumber? Welcome to Warszawa, Warsaw, with ByKaka. We are going to the cheapest place ever, just
because... if you would like to have a date with a girl
in Poland, you have to bring her to a cheap place! Ahaha, Michele, remember! Now I'm gonna get bad comments from Poland. Let's go inside Pijalnia Wodki i Piwa. I always come to such places before going
to party at night, $2 - $3 food and $1 alcohol. It's incredible! I read online that this place is inspired
by the '60s or Poland in the '60s. People forget that we speak Polish; I mean,
I don't speak it, but... You do, your Polish is great! You need to try "Vodka taste of nuts". Yeah... Oh, no! Yes. Yeah, I mean, I will try it, but you know
what my mom always taught me: not to drink vodka with taste. You know, because in Poland you have all these
vodkas... Yeah, but your mother didn't live in Poland
for 30 years, so she's not right anymore. I hope she'll see my vlogs, she will understand
she's not right :) I don't think so! I will send her my video. In Denmark we don't have any vodka with taste,
it's just like... I assure you, it's like drinking Nutella. That doesn't really sound good to me. I love Nutella, but... This is what I say to pic up girls: it's just
Nutella! Another one, another one. This is the place where I would go to have
a cheap night and drinking before going to the club, because I cannot afford to buy drinks in the clubs  despite making more money than you on YouTube. Looks awesome. I love the atmosphere, I love that they have
done something that... Ohoh. What does it mean? Active like when you rest...
how do you say it? Resting what? Like when you go on a holiday, but it's like
an active holiday. Active holiday? It' a diss... Okay, I mean... You didn't get the joke though it was way
funnier than all your jokes. If somebody got this joke, please write it
down in the comments. It's basically like a very traditional Polish
thing, it's jelly with meat inside, it's very weird, it looks weird... And this one is? What's this dish? Ah, it's fish! It's fish! Oh, it's pretty cool. Herring fish in oil. And then over here we have this pork jelly,
which I'm sure I'm not gonna like but  I hope I will be surprised. It tastes weird and it looks weird. it's like this food you in find in motorway restaurants
when you're driving for a very long time and you need to eat something in the car. This is something they would eat  50 years ago. So all the newspaper here from the 60s probably. Where is the date? Oh yeah, true. Could be. Also these very old drinks... [I read by mistake a bad word in Polish language]
I have no idea what I'm reading. I read [bad word], I need control myself for
a moment. Your face... this is gonna be the worst vlog
of your life :) I know. But subscribe to her channel, please. So we are currently waiting for the potato
to boil, then we are gonna have all the food and we are gonna see which one you should
buy. I would also suggest buying tartar, but it's
not available in the morning apparently. Did we decide what shots we're getting? I told you, you need to try this Nutella shot. How is the water? It's vodka. Pure vodka. Vodka with ice. Never believe half Polish girls! Some people drink beers, some people drink
pure vodka. This is how we roll. So disappointing for Poland this girl. Actually yesterday you made me drunk because
I came and I didn't eat... After two glasses of wine? I was so tipsy! I think it's the time of the truth. I'm sure that one is good, this one I'm not... This thing is pretty scary. Yeah, that's not appetizing. Yeah that's something I wouldn't eat normally. Look at your face! It's better than what I was expecting. I'm not a fan but I could survive a day with
this. The bread is good. It really does not look appetizing. I know, I know. So probably if you break the jelly, you find
the meat. She's going to vomit. Let me try to eat just the meat and here we
go. That's not the point, you're supposed to eat
it all. The meat is really good without the jelly. It's fresh, strange. I love that cheese, really. My favorite plate has just arrived, she seems
happy about it. Finally happy about something. Come on! And we did order one last thing... the total
of all these dishes... four plates, two shots, one beer and one water, it is 68 PLN / 17 USD You mean one vodka water. In the past, every shot was one dollar, every
food was two dollars; now the food became three dollars but still okay. That's so very affordable, even for Poland
that's also very affordable. Like Warsaw is actually quite expensive, you
can say. so it's getting way more expensive than it
used to be. Exactly. So I think the last five-ten years they passed
from eighth PLN to twelve PLN. But it's okay, inflation. We are printing money! This is gonna be fish, onions... Should be okay.  Yeah, this one is good. Mmm. Try this. So you take a piece of the potato; I took
like a really tiny piece... then you immerge it in an elegant way. How does it feel? It's so good, it's such a good combo. Potato and cheese. This thing is amazing. Really I love this cheese so much. Really, this is so good. Yeah I know, I know. That's what I get every night before/after
getting drunk. Mom, I never said that. How do you say goodbye in Italian? "Arrivederci"? You can say simply "Ciao". What is "arrivederci"? "Arrivederci" is goobye, yeah. Oh my God, high five to me. Wow. So everything is served, everything is half-eaten. Apart from this little thing. I'm gonna try to take out the meat from the
jelly. You know this dish is not really popular nowadays. It's just like old-style dishes. It's like when sometimes people want to be
nostalgic... I guess  maybe some weirdos like it, nobody
knows, but you know. So this is [food name] or whatever. Am I even in this freaking shot? Like why am I even here if I'm never in the
shot guys, tell me. Because I'm tasting (this food) now and then
you will be in the shot. Come on! Girls, never shoot videos with girls. Mmm, it's okay, it's actually good, but to
have it better you need to place two of them over here. And those are sour cucumbers, I think you
should say it. Sour cucumber, okay. She said that those are sour cucumbers. And they're very like a unique thing in Poland. I don't think you eat them anywhere else (in
the world) really. Those are not cornish... They're not pickles. No oh! Okay, I was thinking it's the same thing. I'm only half Polish guys, only half. Do you have college citizenship? Yeah. Give it back, you don't deserve it! Let me first have a bite. So when it's all three together I'm sure it's
ten times better. All three together it's perfection. If there is one missing: bread, this thing,
and this other thing, cucumber... I'm doing some entertainment to make your
video better :) But for real when... Did you say that the cucumber is sour? I think you said it 100 times... The cucumber is sour, guys. This is not a pickle, it's sour. Okay okay, it's sour. It's sour and very good. Do you know what I love doing? Just eating it like this. Because you're drinking vodka and if you're
drinking vodka as she does, this will absorb alcohol. With a straw. The straw is melting thanks to the alcohol. It's like 60% basically... Polish girls are tough, avoid them. Tougher than half Italian, half polish boys. So is it pickle or is it cucumber? Is it good? Do you like it? With the sour cucumber on top it's really
good. Wiithout it, it's so so. One of the most traditional Danish dishes
is like bread with things on top of it. It's called [Danish dish name] and we eat
it with fork and knife. Like sometimes you even see people eating
lunch at work or school, like a sandwich, with a fork and knife. Danish people are weird. In Africa they say that if you do not eat
with your hands, the food has no taste. I hate eating with my hands because I don't
like getting my hands dirty, I'm like this annoying foreigner: even when I was in India and we were eating off like these banana leaves, which traditionally you're supposed to eat
with like your hands, I asked for a fork and knife. Completely a disgrace. At least I know what's the difference between
a sour cucumber and a pickle, okay? Sorry, I'm eating with my hands. I don't even like eating pizza with my hands,
I eat pizza with a fork. And if that's not crazy, I don't know what
crazy is. You're a weirdo, but ok. She spent 10 minutes complaining about not
eating with her hands and then... I wouldn't go that far and say that it's amazing... With the sour thing on the top is much better,
without it nope. I love this. That's my favorite vodka. Thanks a lot. Okay, we're gonna take this shot now and we
hope Michele is not gonna get wasted like he did yesterday after two glasses of wine. 100% wasted. This shot is Nutella, 100% Nutella and some
vodka. I'm really scared. You spilled it over me! That wasn't the plan. I'm really sorry. You see, I was out of Europe for a very long
time, I'm not able to drink shots. Spill the shot all over me, cool! It was really good, it's so much better than
I expected. Yes, I told you! So guys, now you know: if you have a girl
in Poland, buy her Soplica vodka nuts. It's really good, honestly, I'm shocked. Almost as good as my pure vodka and I bet people are gonna watch this video and be like she's so tough,
she walks around with a glass of vodka! Polish girls. Vodka with vodka,
that's how I like it. We have a vlogger here. Professional vlogger. Thanks a lot for everything, really. Pijalnia Wodki i Piwa (name of the place). [She repeats the name with
a better pronunciation] Thanks a lot, byKaja. You're welcome. Subscribe to her channel and if you want to
eat cheap, but good food, at least unique, you know where to come. Thank you so much for watching, keep reading
and believe in your dreams! Ciao!|||Hello friends! This video will be about
crossing the border between Terespol, Poland and Brest, Belarus on the train. It's actually interesting because when you cross on a train there is a specific procedure. So, the first step when you actually approach the stop the officers come on the train. They check all your documents and they put a stamp that you have exited the European Union This is the first step and it's actually quite easy one. The second step is when you actually enter Belarus when you
enter Belarus and there will be the process of getting your documents
checked once again. As you can see we just crossed the river and right there
there will be a checkpoint. And on that checkpoint they gonna check your
documents again. It's interesting, they took all the documents, they collect all those.
They look at your face and check that it's actually your face. Then they take all those out and probably they go somewhere and stamp those. Then they return back to you,
the whole process takes like 30 to 40 minutes depending a number of people on board. And they actually check all the luggage. Well, not all the luggage but it's their job to check that you are not brining anything illegal. At the same time it looks a bit strange and intimidating at times Anyway, we have arrived at the beautiful city of Brest, Belarus I just wanted to show you around, please take a look Here we are the Brest railway station and as you can see it feels a bit Soviet Even all those trains look a bit soviet There is so much indication of Soviet era here As you can see there is a Lenin monument Lenin passed through this station on his way to immigration - that's why Let's overlook the railway station, here is a war memorial And now we are looking at the park There is a park nearby a railway station and it also feel a bit Soviet but at the same time it's very peaceful, children are walking everywhere It's very clean and beautiful I'm looking around the downtown and as I said - it's very beautiful Some parts of city are very modern, not everything is Soviet For example, this is the alee of lamps. And there are different sculptures in the form of lamps. I have never seen anything like that before I was amazed Unfortunately I didn't had enough time to visit all the city attractions but I just want to show you around. I hope you liked this video. Please press the like button, subscribe and see you later soon!|||winter in zakopane, poland december 2022, christmas zakopane|||hello and welcome back to borders today we're heading east to poland [Music] poland officially known as the republic of poland is a european country made up of 16 provinces or states called voivode boyfordships and has the same temperate climate as countries like the uk poland's flag has horizontal bands of colour half white half red and was officially adopted as the national flag in 1919 although the cutters red and white have been linked with the country from the middle ages this republic is boarded by seven different countries for germany to the west slovakia and the czech republic in the south and southwest ukraine to the south east belarus in the east and lithuania and a tiny province of russia to the northeast over the last 100 years the people of poland and its capital warsaw have seen the worst of world war ii and the soviet rule but today it's a free and democratic state in europe|||countries as superheroes part two AI generated illustrations [Music] check out Ai and Technology playlist And subscribe to the Curiosity corner|||Brak dostępnych napisów dla tego filmu.|||Global Management Challenge is the world's largest strategy and management competition. Participating managerial and student teams consist of 3 to 5 people. Each team works on managing their own virtual company on a simulated global market. All teams compete in the on-line system The goal of the competition is to achieve the highest investment performance. The competition consists of 2 on-line rounds and a national final. The winner of the national competition becomes the representative for the GMC International Final. GMC is a global competition. Polish editions are organized by BIGRAM. GMC Poland gathers managers, specialists, young talents and students. This virtual simulation allows them to become  top managers and run their own companies. They can effectively develop knowledge and skills on strategy planning and management, team work, financial analysis and decision making. Companies invite their employees to this exciting gamification in order to strengthen their employer branding, and give talents opportunity for intense managerial grow. Employers also sponsor chosen student teams, so they can better understand the business world and have their first practical professional experience. Do you want to see how you perform in the role of a CEO? Sign up for the Global Management Challenge!|||